Methodology {#sec:method}
===========

Introduction
------------

Interactions, Work, and Labour: Approaches to Fieldwork and Analysis {#sec:method:fieldwork}
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The research initially set out to understand how digital systems can be
used to do stuff with accounts and accountability in charities.

This section therefore seeks to justify the use of ethnomethodology as
the orientation to the fieldwork performed in order to gather data,
places the use of workshops within this, and also explores how a Marxist
stance on political economy (and to a lesser extent, sociology) also
influenced the analysis of fieldwork data and the subsequent design of
systems developed as a response to it.

### Ethnomethodological Orientation to Fieldwork

### Taking a Marxist stance

The performance of the first large portion of fieldwork in the study,
beginning March 2016, overlapped with a series of events in my personal
life that began a slide across the political spectrum towards Communism.
This is worth mentioning because the process resulted in engagment with
a host of classic, modern, and academic literatures. These had a
subsequent effect on my reading of fieldwork data, and helped shape the
design of systems that were built in response.

Marxism, and therfore Marxist stances, can be said to be concerned
primarily with the relationships between workers, their labour, capital,
and property . The foci offered by Marxism resonated with the research
goals in as much as they were set out to determine in what ways the work
of charities related to finanical capital, and what role technology
played in this relationship. In Marxism, the work and value of any
organisation, charities included, is ultimately derived from the labour
of its workers @marx_contribution_1970.

Reflecting on the performance
-----------------------------
