Methodology {#sec:method}
===========

Introduction
------------

Interactions, Work, and Labour: Approaches to Fieldwork and Analysis {#sec:method:fieldwork}
--------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ethnomethodological Orientation to Fieldwork

### Taking a Marxist stance

The performance of the first large portion of fieldwork in the study,
beginning March 2016, overlapped with a series of events in my personal
life that began a slide across the political spectrum towards Communism.
This is worth mentioning because the process resulted in engagment with
a host of classic, modern, and academic literatures. These had a
subsequent effect on my reading of fieldwork data, and helped shape the
design of systems that were built in response.

Marxism, and therefore Marxist stances, can be said to be concerned
primarily with the relationships between workers, their labour, capital,
and property . The foci offered by Marxism resonated with the research
goals in as much as they were set out to determine in what ways the work
of charities related to financial capital, and what role technology
played in this relationship. In Marxism, the work and value of any
organisation, charities included, is ultimately derived from the labour
of its workers @marx_contribution_1970. Classic political economy (e.g.
@smith_inquiry_1785) divides labour into the categories of *Productive
Labour* and *Unproductive Labour*. *Productive Labour* is labour that
directly goes into increasing the wealth of an organisation, whereas
*Unproductive Labour* is that which does not; but is nontheless
necessary for the organisation or nation to function
@smith_inquiry_1785. Marxism is famous for its critique of this
classical and arbitrary divide of the productive and unproductive forms
of labour; a critique that, in summary, attacks the notions of
*Productive* and *Unproductive* as having no neutral definition
@marx_capital_1974. Instead, what is seen as *Productive* or
*Unproductive* is in constant flux and based on a multitude of different
factors such as the mode of production[^1], social class, and what the
‘product’ actually is @marx_capital_1974.

Reflecting on the performance
-----------------------------

[^1]: E.g. feudalism, capitalism, etc.
