Background and Literature {#sec:related}
=========================

This chapter discusses the background and literature of the various
fields that inform this research. Given the interdisciplinary history of
HCI research, and the socio-economic domain of non-profit enterprise, it
should come of no surprise that this results in a rich and diverse nexus
of perspectives which needs to be accounted for.

What is an NPO?
---------------

This section explores the definition of Non-Profit Organisations, their
roles and activities, and the values of those roles. It also considers
some of the various forms an NPO can take, and The definition of an NPO
has historically been problematic, due to the sheer diversity of the
both the organisations themselves, and the legal frameworks in which
they operate @salamon_search_1992. NPOs are typically seen to operate in
what is known as the *third sector* of the economy, emphasising their
separation from public-owned and private business enterprises; however
the term is often used interchangeably with *Voluntary Sector*,
*Independent Sector*, *Charitable Sector*, and many others
@evers_third_2004 [@salamon_search_1992]. Salamon and Anheier claim that
the deluge of definitions pose a problem to the sector, as each term
emphasises a particular characteristic of the sector at the cost of
downplaying others, which is often misleading. An example of this would
be how the term *Voluntary Sector* emphasises the contributions of
volunteers in the operation of NPOs, at the expense of organisations or
activities that are performed by paid employees of NPOs; Frumkin prefers
the term *Non-Profit and Voluntary Sector* for this reason, whilst
Lohmann prefers the term *Social Economy* @frumkin_being_2009
[@salamon_search_1992; @lohmann_charity_2007]. The diversity of the
*third sector* means that a general definition of NPOs is difficult to
generate, however Salamon and Anheier go some way to providing one based
off of the structural or operational characteristics of NPOs; which
therefore allows their definition to cater for the diversity of legal
structures, funding, and functions of NPOs @salamon_search_1992
[@frumkin_being_2009]. Salamon and Anheier identify five base
characteristics common to NPOs in their definition: *Formal*, having
been institutionalised to some extent; *Private*, meaning that they are
institutionally separated from government; *Non-profit-distributing*,
where any profits generated from activities are reinvested directly into
the <span>*“basic mission of the agency”*</span> instead of distributed
to owners or directors; *Self-governing*, with their own internal
protocols or procedures as opposed to being controlled by external
entities; and *Voluntary*, where the organisation’s activities or
management involves a meaningful degree of voluntary participation
@salamon_search_1992. This definition is not without issue: it notably
excludes various quasi-commercial entities in the UK such as building
societies and cooperatives, as well as important historical entities
operating in the 19th century; and its usefulness for identifying
factors that affect NPO development (one of its original purposes) is
questionable @morris_defining_2000
[@kendall_voluntary_1996; @kendall_voluntary_1996-1; @steinberg_comment_1998].
Salamon and Anheier’s framework does, however, provide an adequate
vehicle through which the characteristics of NPOs can be brought to
light. Frumkin similarly gives three characteristics of NPOS which align
with Salamon and Anheier’s framework: NPOs do not coerce participation;
their profits are not given to stakeholders; and they lack clear lines
of ownership and accountability @frumkin_being_2009. As noted, the
activities of NPOs are incredibly diverse. Salamon states that NPOs
<span>*“deliver human services, promote grass-roots economic
development, prevent environmental degradation, protect civil rights and
pursue a thousand other objectives formerly unattended or left to the
state”*</span>, an insight which admittedly barely begins to describe
the wide scope of NPO activity, and speaks to a larger issue surrounding
misleading classifications and discussions of the organisations
themselves @salamon_rise_1994 [@salamon_search_1992-1]. In further
discussion of NPO classification, Salamon and Anheier state <span>*“No
single classification system is perfect for all possible
purposes”*</span>, but attempt to explain NPO activities through
developing a system known as the *International Classification of
Nonprofit Organisations (ICNPO)*; which classifies NPOs into 12 groups
based on economic activity, with an additional 24 sub-groups
@salamon_search_1992-1. The resulting classifications themselves are
very high-level, with groups such as *Health* and *Social Services*, but
the sub-groups begin to hint at the type of activities NPOs engage e.g.
*Nursing Homes*, and *Income support and maintenance*
@salamon_search_1992-1. Hansmann writes on the role of NPOs that they
often emerge from a <span>*“contract failure”*</span> of the market to
police the producers of services, and very rarely exist in industrial
sectors @hansmann_role_1980. According to Hansmann, economic theory
dictates that the ability of consumers to: accurately compare providers;
reach agreement as to the price and quality of service to be exchanged;
and assess the compliance of the organisation to their part of the deal
and obtain redress if the organisation has not complied
@hansmann_role_1980. The services offered by NPOs often involve a
separation between the purchaser of a service and the recipient (e.g.
the purchase and transport of food stuffs overseas), and the inability
of NPOs to distribute profits to shareholders removes the incentive (and
power) of organisations to reduce direct spend on the service provided –
<span>*“The reason is simply that contributors \[to a for-profit
business\] would have little or no assurance that their payments to a
for-profit station were actually needed to pay for the service they
received”*</span> @hansmann_role_1980. Mendel and Brudney discuss the
relationship between NPOs and *Public Value*, claiming that its creation
is <span>*“philanthropy at its best”*</span> @mendel_doing_2014. King
elaborates on the role of NPOs as

### What is a Charity?

### What is a Social Enterprise?

Traditionally, NPOs have embraced values such as philanthropy and
voluntarism in order to advocate for, and to provide the means for,
services to their client-base @alexander_adoption_1998. Social
Enterprise and Social Entrepreneurship have risen as a response to these
challenges faced by NPOS today @dart_legitimacy_2004. Dart broadly
describes Social Enterprise as <span>*“significantly influenced by
business thinking and by a primary focus on results and outcomes for
client groups and communities”*</span> @dart_legitimacy_2004, Dees
states that Social Enterprise <span>*“combines the passion of a social
mission with an image of business-like discipline”*</span>
@dees_meaning_1998. In practice, this often includes activities and
practices that include revenue-source diversification, fee-for-service
programs, and partnerships with the private sector
@dart_legitimacy_2004. Social Enterprise, whilst often regarded as a
miracle solution @dart_legitimacy_2004
[@harding_social_2004; @dees_meaning_1998], is not without criticism.
Eikenberry writes that NPOs, focusing on bottom-line expenditure and
adopting a social enterprise model actually poses a threat to civil
society @eikenberry_marketization_2004. She argues that the on the
bottom line and overhead expenditures forcing NPOs to embrace market
values and entrepreneurial attitudes, and changing the way that they
operate has been detrimental. Dart claims that Social Enterprise differs
traditional NPOs as they generally <span>*“blur boundaries”*</span>
between nonprofit and for-profit activities, and even enact
<span>*“hybrid”*</span> activities @dart_legitimacy_2004. This could
include activities such as engaging with marketing contracts as opposed
to accepting donations, as well as behaviour such as cutting services
that are not deemed to be cost-effective @eikenberry_marketization_2004.
Implications of industry funded NPOs notwithstanding
@jacobson_lifting_2005, the shift of effort from effective service
delivery to financial strategy impacts negatively on the social capital
that is generated. This is through less emphasis on building
relationships with stakeholders (previously an essential survival
strategy) as service users become framed as consumers, and through
market pressures diverting resources towards skills such as project
management and away from activities that build social capital
@eikenberry_marketization_2004. Doherty et al. echo this in their
description of Social Enterprises, distinguishing them from traditional
NPOs by stating that the latter are <span>*“more likely to remain
dependent on gifts and grants rather than developing true paying
customers”*</span> @doherty_diverse_2006.

Why is Transparency important to NPOs?
--------------------------------------

> <span>*“Nowhere, therefore, does transparency get more problematic
> than in financial reporting for public companies. Going back as far as
> the 1600s, financial reporting scandals have been the most visible and
> far-reaching examples of hidden information and outright
> fraud”*</span> - Richard Oliver, *What is Transparency? (2004)*

Transparency and Accountability are seen increasingly desirable in
governments and organisations @hood_accountability_2010
[@oliver_what_2004; @heald_fiscal_2003]. Oliver states that Transparency
has <span>*“moved over the last several hundred years from an
intellectual ideal to center stage in a drama being played out across
the globe in many forms and functions”*</span> @oliver_what_2004. Corrêa
et al. say Transparency and Open Government is <span>*“synonymous with
efficient and collaborative government”*</span> @correa_really_2014, and
Steele goes as far to say <span>*“Transparency is the new ‘app’ that
launches civilization 2.0”*</span> @steele_open-source_2012. Non-Profit
Organisations (NPOs) in the UK are held to stringent Transparency
standards by an organisation known as the Charity Commission, which is
responsible for registering and regulating charities in England and
Wales <span>*“to ensure that the public can support charities with
confidence”*</span> @hm_government_charity_????. The development of
trust is foundational in the relationship between an organisation and
those invested in its activities or performance, known as stakeholders,
which is compounded by the notion that a stakeholder in an NPO might not
be in direct receipt of its services @macmillan_relationship_2005
[@krashinsky_stakeholder_1997]. Beyond this, accountability is seen as a
way of building legitimacy as an organisation
@anheier_accountability_2009. Watchdog organisations such as the Charity
Commission and others therefore play an important role in developing
stakeholder relationships with NPOs through Transparency measures,
making them accountable to those invested in them. Oliver writes that
NPO expenditure is often the <span>*“most emotional”*</span>, and a
person’s decision to invest in a charity will be down to how comfortable
and confident they are in its operation @oliver_what_2004. Hood writes
that <span>*“Transparency is more often preached than practised \[and\]
more often invoked than defined”*</span> @hood_transparency_2006-1. This
section considers various definitions of Transparency in relation to the
UK Charity Commission, NPOs, and the measures that are taken to make
them accountable to stakeholders. It also inspects Transparency’s
synonymity with Accountability.

### What is Transparency?

Historically, Transparency was inherent in the actions and interactions
of everyday society since, in traditional societies, the density of
social networks made one’s actions highly visible
@meijer_understanding_2009. Meijer contrasts this with modern societies
where <span>*“people do not know each other – many people in cities do
not even know their neighbors”*</span> and argues that societies which
operate at a larger scale suffer a decline in social control, which
calls for new forms of Transparency that match the scale of the society
@meijer_understanding_2009.

Transparency has been a watch-word for governance since the late 20th
century, yet its roots stretch back much further. In a discussion of
Transparency’s historical context, Hood identifies three ‘strains’ of
pre-20th-century thought that are at least partial predecessors to
Transparency’s modern doctrine: rule-governed administration; candid and
open social communication; and ways of making organisation and society
‘knowable’ @hood_transparency_2006-1.

Rule-governed administration is the idea that government should operate
in accordance to fixed and predictable rules and, and Hood calls it the
<span>*“one of the oldest ideas in political thought”*</span>
@hood_transparency_2006-1. Early proponents of candid and open
discussion liken transparency to one’s natural state, and it saw an
implementation in the ‘town meeting’ method of governance where members
of the town would deliberate in the presence of one another – making all
deals transparent and ensuring all parties were mutually accountable
@hood_transparency_2006-1. The third of Hood’s ‘strains’ of
proto-Transparency doctrines, is the notion of making the social world
‘knowable’; largely through methods or techniques that act as
counterparts to studying natural or physical phenomena. Hood describes
an 18th-century <span>*“police science”*</span> which exposed the public
to view through the introduction of street lighting or open spaces, as
well as the publication of information (all of which designed to help
prevent crime) @hood_transparency_2006-1.

Heald describes modern Transparency as directional; with the direction
of the Transparency indicating who is visible, and to whom
@heald_varieties_2006. Transparency, according to Heald, has four
directions on two planes: upwards and downwards; inwards and outwards.
*Upwards* Transparency indicates that those higher in a hierarchy can
observe the conduct, behaviour, or results of those below – whilst
*Downwards* Transparency is the means by which those lower in a
hierarchy can observe those above them. In a similar dichotomy,
*Outwards* Transparency is used to describe how an organisation can see
‘outside’, to either understand habitat or monitor peers and
competitors. Situations where those external to an organisation can
observe what’s happening inside are described as examples of *Inwards*
Transparency @heald_varieties_2006. These can (and often do) coexist as
any combination of the four i.e. having *Upwards* Transparency does not
preclude the existence of its counterpart, *Downwards* Transparency, and
when the two coexist there is a symmetry on that plane (vertical or
horizontal) @heald_varieties_2006.

The combination of *Downwards* and *Outwards* Transparencies could be
said to describe a form of surveillance, where employers can monitor
their workers or a government can monitor the activities of its citizens
@heald_varieties_2006. The inverse, *Upwards* and *Inwards*, implies a
form of *Sousveillance* – a term coined by Steve Mann meaning <span>*“to
watch from below”*</span> @mann_sousveillance:_2004. Mann gives two
possible interpretations of *Sousveillance*, the first being the
relative positions of the cameras in physical and social space (e.g.
cameras on phones), with the other being an inversion of hierarchical
surveillance and a close match to Heald’s descriptions of *Upwards*
Transparency, where the citizen can peer into an organisation
@mann_sousveillance:_2004 [@heald_varieties_2006]. Sousveillance is
often discussed in the context of citizens capturing abuses of power at
street-level by trusted entities such as: police officers; security
personnel; or similar entities, but Ganascia also discusses how an
increased desire for access to public information has lead to
aspirations for <span>*“total transparency”*</span>, which in the US has
resulted in governmental endorsement of data sharing (often called *Open
Government* or *Government 2.0*) @ganascia_generalized_2010. There have
been similar moves in the UK (e.g. data.gov.uk) which are designed to
improve the delivery and accountability of public services
@shadbolt_linked_2012.

An example of this from UK would be the presence of the Charity
Commission, which enforces transparency measures that are applied to
NPOs. Schauer writes of Transparency that for information, or processes,
to qualify as transparent they must be <span>*“open and available for
scrutiny”*</span> @schauer_transparency_2011. This notably lacks an
explanation of who can take advantage of transparent information, and at
what cost to them. Transparency, according to Schauer, cannot be equated
with knowledge; at best it facilitates it @schauer_transparency_2011.
Hood similarly acknowledges this as an area of tension between the
<span>*“town meeting”*</span> form of Transparency, and its distant
cousin concerned with accounting and book-keeping
@hood_transparency_2006-1. Oliver echoes this sentiment, describing
Transparency as a journey in contrast to a destination
@oliver_what_2004.

Data released pertaining to resource allocation is an example of what
Heald describes as *Input Transparency*, which is easily measurable but
doesn’t necessarily address the link between this input and any outcome
@heald_fiscal_2003 [@heald_varieties_2006]. An NPO’s nature as
*not-for-profit* additionally compounds the issues with using this data,
since “bottom-line” measurements cannot be used, and allocation of funds
to an activity or project doesn’t indicate whether it is under, or over,
funded @henderson_performance_2002. Oliver states that, where
stakeholders are concerned, transparent communication involves
<span>*“focusing on more than just the traditional numbers, such as
financial data, customer statistics, and operational metrics”*</span>,
and that discussions of the stakeholders <span>*“value drivers”*</span>
should be had, and that they should be <span>*“accurate and
understandable”*</span> @oliver_what_2004. This forms part of a grander
move, alluded to by Oliver and Schauer, away from *Old Transparency*
(Oliver) or *Passive Transparency* (Schauer) and towards newer and more
engaging forms of transparent practice.

Transparency in government and business has traditionally been a
relatively passive affair, equating to the provision of data without
particular concern to its promotion or interpretation
@schauer_transparency_2011 [@oliver_what_2004]. Even various ‘Freedom of
Information’ (FOI) Acts around the world, require that public companies
provide information *on request* but do not stipulate the format
required – and Worthy claims that whilst the UK Act has succeeded in
making the government more transparent, it is not more trusted
@hood_transparency_2006-1 [@_freedom_2000; @worthy_more_2010]. This
attitude is summed up by Oliver as <span>*“letting the truth be
available to others to see if they so choose, or perhaps think to look,
or have the time, means and skills to look”*</span> @oliver_what_2004.
Societal factors such as the prevalence of information technology and
media scrutiny have helped develop a movement towards more active forms
of Transparency, called *New Transparency* by Oliver and *Active
Transparency* by Schauer @oliver_what_2004 [@schauer_transparency_2011].
These newer forms of Transparency are more concerned with the
<span>*“active disclosure”*</span> of information by organisations,
seeing Transparency itself as an act of communication concerned with the
organisation’s responsibilities @schauer_transparency_2011
[@oliver_what_2004].

Modern information technologies play an important role in defining
transparency, Meijer claims <span>*“Modern transparency is
computer-mediated transparency”*</span> @meijer_understanding_2009. A
key characteristic in <span>*“Computer-mediated Transparency”*</span> is
that it shifts the direction of transparency from a two-way interaction
such as in face-to-face interactions to a one-way interaction such as
viewing data on a web page @meijer_understanding_2009. Meijer gives the
example of citizens attending council meetings – they can interrogate
the councillors, but the councillors could also see citizens who had
attended, whereas now councils cannot see who visits their web pages
@meijer_understanding_2009.

### NPO Reporting Requirements and Responsibilities

### Transparency and Accountability

The imposition of transparency measures is generally seen as tantamount
to ensuring accountability of institutions, organisations, or
individuals in power; and often the terms are used interchangeably
@fox_uncertain_2007 [@hood_accountability_2010]. The two terms, however,
are separate and have their own (if somewhat malleable) definitions
@fox_uncertain_2007. Fox discusses accountability in terms of
<span>*“the capacity or right to demand answers”*</span> or the
<span>*“capacity to sanction”*</span>, whereas transparency concerns
itself with the public’s right and ability to access information; and
whilst common wisdom dictates that transparency generates
accountability, this assumption is challenged when held to scrutiny
@fox_uncertain_2007. Fox’s analysis of transparency divides it into two
categories – *clear transparency* and *opaque* or *fuzzy transparency* –
which closely resemble Schauer and Oliver’s definitions of the *Active*
or *New Transparency* and the *Passive* or *Old Transparency*
@schauer_transparency_2011 [@oliver_what_2004; @fox_uncertain_2007]. Fox
argues the importance of this distinction lies in the fact that as
Transparency becomes an increasingly desirable term, opponents will
express their dissent through provision of *fuzzy transparency*. This is
data which lacks information that can reveal organisational behaviour
and thus cannot be used to generate accountability @fox_uncertain_2007.
The *Clear Transparency* alluded to by Fox is defined as
<span>*“information-access policies \[and\] programmes that reveal
reliable information about institutional performance, specifying
officials’ responsibilities \[and\] where public funds go”*</span>.
Importantly, though *Clear Transparency* is concerned with
organisational behaviour, it is not sufficient to generate
accountability – which requires the intervention of other actors
@fox_uncertain_2007. Accountability is also explained by Fox as either
*Soft Accountability* (the ability to demand answers) and *Hard
Accountability* (the ability to issue sanctions). Fox stipulates that
appropriate levels of *Clear Transparency* gives the public the ability
to perceive problems, and to demand answers – which is a form of *Soft
Accountability* known as *answerability* @fox_uncertain_2007. Further
forms of accountability are founded on the ability to not only reveal
existing data, but to investigate and produce information about
organisational behaviour @fox_uncertain_2007. Anheir and Hawkes reflect
Fox’s sentiment in their discussion of Accountability, where they
describe Accountability as a <span>*“multi-dimensional concept that
needs unpacking before becoming a useful policy concept and management
tool”*</span>, and note that in the case of trans-national
organisations; Accountability itself is a problem, and not simply a
solution @anheier_accountability_2009. This discussion, whilst focusing
on the difficulty of regulating accountability across national borders,
has insight into the ways that transparency mechanisms may not be
adequate for generating true accountability in NPOs. They highlight how
it is often media companies that reveal ‘unethical behaviour’ to the
public, rather than formal auditing bodies – an example from the UK
would be how the NPO *Kid’s Company* experienced negative media coverage
over their closure relating to alleged misuse of funds @elgot_kids_2015
[@anheier_accountability_2009]. Anheir and Hawkes also draw on Koppel’s
‘Five Dimensions of Accountability’ framework – which imbues
Accountability with a five-part typology: *transparency*; *liability*;
*controllability*; *responsibility*; and *responsiveness*
@anheier_accountability_2009 [@koppell_pathologies_2005]. Koppel avoids
trying to produce a definitive definition of Accountability, stating
<span>*“\[to layer\] every imagined meaning of accountability into a
single definition would render the concept meaningless”*</span>, and the
five-dimensional typology is instead designed to facilitate discussion
of the term @koppell_pathologies_2005. Transparency features prominently
in the typology, with Koppell referring to it as one of the
<span>*“foundations, supporting notions that underpin accountability in
all of its manifestations”*</span> alongside liability
@koppell_pathologies_2005. Liability, according to Koppell, is the
attachment of consequences to performance and culpability to
Transparency – punishing organisations or individuals for failure, and
rewarding them for successes @koppell_pathologies_2005. In this, the
‘foundational’ dimensions of Koppell’s typology are aligned with Fox’s
definitions of Accountability which covers the capacity of demanding
answers and to sanction, with Transparency as the ability to access the
information in the first place @koppell_pathologies_2005
[@fox_uncertain_2007]. The remaining three dimensions of Koppell’s
typology: *controllability*; *responsibility*; and *responsiveness* are
all built upon the foundations of Transparency and Liability.
*Controllability* is a form of accountability where if <span>*“X can
induce the behaviour of Y \[then\] X controls Y \[and\] Y is accountable
to X”*</span> @koppell_pathologies_2005. Koppell notes that
*Controllability* can be difficult in organisations that have multiple
stakeholders to whom the organisation is supposed to be controlled by
[@koppell_pathologies_2005]. *Responsibility* denotes the constraint of
behaviour through laws, rules, or norms such as legal frameworks or
professional standards of conduct. *Responsiveness* in the typology
describes the attention of an organisation to the needs of its clients,
as opposed to the following of hierarchical orders
@koppell_pathologies_2005. .

How can digital technologies support NPO Transparency and Accountability?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transparency and Accountability can be said to be ultimately concerned
with the sharing of information and the creation of pathways or
mechanisms that allows stakeholders to act in accordance to it. Meijer
argues that <span>*“modern transparencies are computer-mediated”*</span>
@meijer_understanding_2009, and Oliver goes as far to posit that modern
technologies have sparked a self-sustaining *Information - Transparency
Cycle* which is <span>*“unstoppable”*</span> and that information is now
a commodity which is cheap to collect, organise, analyse, and
distribute; the result of which is a reaction to missing information and
a return to the collection phase @oliver_what_2004. Similarly, Steele,
in his *Open Source Everything Manfiesto* reflects on the ways in which
The Internet has enabled the public to overcome previous restrictions on
access to information and states, in no unclear terms, <span>*“This
bodes well for humanity”*</span> @steele_open-source_2012.

Broadly, there are several strands of research into digital technologies
that support interacting with information and data in this way;
primarily these can be encapsulated within the areas of Open Data, and
Human-Data Interaction (HDI) although the inter-disciplinary nature of
HCI as a whole means that the subject matter naturally intersects or
otherwise touches upon other research within the field. This section
explores the potential and implications for how data may be produced and
appropriated by charities and their stakeholders through a discussion
around Open Data, Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) and Human-Data
Interaction. It then turns to the pragmatic and investigates previous
HCI research into previous examples pertaining to enabling interactions
with finances

**This bit is orphaned at the moment! But intersesting to keep in mind**
An interesting case where Transparency has been built into the core of
digital infrastucture is the Free Software movement and, to a lesser
extent, the Open Source movement (for clarification please refer to
(citation) ). In his original manifesto for Free Software, Stallman
outlines the ‘Four Freedoms’ that all Free Sofware grants, and how the
licensing enforces these. These, in summary, are:

The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose (freedom 0).
The freedom to study how the program works, and change it so it does
your computing as you wish (freedom 1). Access to the source code is a
precondition for this. The freedom to redistribute copies so you can
help your neighbor (freedom 2). The freedom to distribute copies of your
modified versions to others (freedom 3). By doing this you can give the
whole community a chance to benefit from your changes. Access to the
source code is a precondition for this.

Discussing this in terms of Transparency, Camp notes that the conditions
for access to Source Code allows members of the community to effectively
audit the code as one might with an organisation’s accounts.

Open Data, uses and implications
--------------------------------

Open Data is <span>*“data that anyone can access, use, or share”*</span>
@open_data_institute_what_nodate. It consists of organised data that is,
generally, structured and placed online so that it can be consumed for
use. Open Data can be produced, shared, and used by many people in many
different contexts (e.g. scientific data sets, or government collection
of environmental data). Often, it is parsed or processed in some way by
digital technologies, and multiple datasets may also be combined in
order to produce a desired insight for the stakeholder(s) consuming the
data.

Human Data Interaction (HDI) is an coalescing field that is concerned
with the social world of how people interact with data about themselves
and others. Whilst it considers technical infrastructure surrounding
data @mcauley_dataware_2011, HDI also brings data’s role as a ‘Boundary
Object’ @star_institutional_1989 to the fore and considers its role as a
pervasive aspect of everyday life in terms of how to enable citizens to
interact with this data in a more explicit fashion
@mortier_human-data_2014.

A ‘Boundary Object’ is anything which may be recognised across different
social ‘worlds’, yet may be appropriated and adapted by the needs of
individuals and groups in a manner that pertains to their specific needs
and context. Star and Griesemer describe Boundary Objects as
<span>*“both plastic enough to adapt to local needs ... yet robust
enough to maintain a common identity across sites”*</span>
@star_institutional_1989 A good example of this is a receipt of
purchase; it is inarguably a receipt, yet may be used by the bank to
verify a purchase, by a store to prove that you own the items you’ve
purchased, and proof that a transaction has occurred between your bank
account and a store. Further to this, Crabtree and Mortier elaborate
that Boundary Objects are “inherently social” and possess a “processual
character” as part of the infrastructure of everyday life. To this end,
they argue that Data is not so much an object in-and-of-itself but
rather an object that is inherently embedded in human relationships
@crabtree_human_2015.

Data’s use as a Boundary Object is demonstrated effectively by the rise
in personal informatics. In the Quantified Self movement, individuals
collect and process various forms and sources of data about them as
individuals, generally for the purposes of recording progress towards
various goals @swan_emerging_2009 [@swan_quantified_2013]. Contrasting
the movement’s general use of data as a pragmatic, goal-oriented object,
Elsden et al demonstrate that data can be experienced by people in many
ways and can serve different purposes such as providing playful ways to
engage with each other and one’s own data @elsden_quantified_2014
[@elsden_metadating:_2016]. In particular, it is posited that data can
offer an ‘alternative lens’ that other media does not, allowing people
to view or represent an event in a different ways than originally
envisioned and one that can be combined with other more traditional
forms of documenting; and in doing so indicates that the record is
always unfinalised and is continuously open to reinterpretation
@elsden_designing_2017.

Additionally, data as a Boundary Object has place within an
organisational context, offering opportunities to use and present data
in an exploratory context in people’s shared worlds. In an academic
context (most UK Universities possess charitable status and thus belong
to the Third Sector), visualising research funding across the
institution was found to act as a means of supporting members of staff
in understanding the funding landscape of the organisation and in
communicating narratives to the outside world around perceived
successes. The system (and by extension, its data) was also found to
support the review and contestation of data when multiple
interpretations were available, and Elsden et al explicitly note its
implications for organisational transparency; with the caveat that a
major design question raised by the research is whether
contextualisation should occur merely through the data, or in
conversation around it @elsden_resviz:_2016.

As discussed, the presentation of information is not enough to engage in
more modern forms of transparent practice; and the use of data (however
nicely it may be visualised) is no exception to this and risks simply
rehashing the older forms of transparency with faster production of
data. Cornford et al write that the UK Government’s agenda of producing
Open Government Data (OGD) fails to address the questions of how
information is to be interpreted for local contexts; mirroring the
concerns of Elsden et al around how data should be contextualised.
Cornford et al argue that a wealth of open and structured data merely
provides a ‘view from nowhere’ and that the true challenge lies in
developing the interpretive communities that will utilise the
information effectively @cornford_local_2013.

Some successes have been seen in the uses of OGD for engagement; the
London Datastore @noauthor_london_nodate collects, organises, and
distributes a variety of Open Data pertaining to the City of London in
the UK, and has seen great successes in terms of use-cases where
developers and organisations have used data for service provision and
governance purposes @coleman_lessons_2013. In the US, journalists have
begun utilising data to fuel their practice @ramos_journalists_2013, and
it has been argued that the proliferation of OGD has directly
contributed to a ‘habit of engagement’ that in turn begins to develop a
culture of civic participation through the use and responses to data
about our civic world @gordon_making_2013-1. Black and Burstein
conceptualise a movement towards the ‘Twenty-First Century Town Hall’
@black_local_2013 (possibly indicating a full circle movement to a more
direct forms of Transparency discussed above) whereas Bloom postulates
that OGD will form a new Commons resource @bloom_towards_2013.

Sense making and engagement stemming from the use of Open Data draws
upon the field known as ‘Open-Source Intelligence’ (OSINT). Generally,
OSINT concerns itself with the gathering of intelligence for problem
solving from various public information sources @bradbury_plain_2011
[@glassman_intelligence_2012]. This places it in contrast to other forms
of intelligence-gathering which are generally performed using specialist
or secret sources of information. Traditionally, this would look like
utilising sources such as newspapers and public records but in the
modern era sources such as Open Data and Social Media profiles may be
used as viable sources of information to begin making steps towards
solving intelligence problems @bizer_emerging_2009.

The implications of an Open Data-fuelled OSINT for Transparency and
Accountability are evident. As discussed, OSINT is concerned primarily
with the application of information to solve issues or answer questions,
so it stands to reason that an adequate data infrastructure would allow
for (or even promote) engagement of stakeholders in OSINT for asking
questions of charitable organisations (the ‘Habit of Engagement alluded
to earlier @gordon_making_2013-1). At the very least, such an
infrastructure would enable the organisations to produce effective and
interactive responses to queries around the performance of their work
and their spending.

Steele discusses the power of OSINT at length. Coming from a position
that “the only unlimited resource in the world is the human brain”,
Steele puts forward that the engendering of Transparency via the
production of Open Data, and the resultant OSINT practices, would lead
to a systematic practice of exchanging information openly and allow
societal actors and stakeholders to evaluate and respond to complex
problems. Whilst Steele refers directly to engagement with Governmental
processes, this would see use in the context of Charities as well when
presenting information about their work within the context of
complexity. A pragmatic example that might be most interesting for
charities is the example of a ‘True Cost’ calculation – wherein the True
Cost of a white cotton T-Shirt is outlined in economic, societal, and
environmental terms.

In summation, it appears that digital technologies surrounding Open Data
and its use as a Boundary Object have strong implications for the
support of Charities in terms of Transparency and Accountability. Use of
data has in the past demonstrated a usefulness in civic and academic
contexts, supporting processes that are integral to Transparency (review
and contestation), as well as potentially acting as a vector to allowing
stakeholders to explore the complexities orbiting particular topics such
True Cost, and therefore spending. With this in mind the discussion now
turns to previous HCI work in the area of interacting with finances.

### How do digital technologies allow people to interact with finances?

Some systems allow donators to charities to specify conditions on each
other e.g. CODO, whilst others can coordinate funders. No work on
matching donations to charity activities HCI research has previous
concerned itself with investigating the ways in which digital
technologies facilitate individual interactions around money, looking at
how technology can be used to track personal finances or manage low
incomes @kaye_money_2014 [@vines_pay_2014]. Kaye et al’s work around
technologies used to track finances demonstrates a tendency towards an
emotional relationship with finances, where decisions are motivated
through factors such as fears over debt, or aspirations to own specific
material items @kaye_money_2014. Kaye et al () show that people
construct separate and distinct <span>*“pots of money”*</span> based on
either source of income, or desired purpose @kaye_money_2014. This
manifests in daily practices such as separate bank cards for various
purposes, and whilst an individual may place value on a particular silo
beyond a financial figure (e.g. emotional attachment to work involved) –
Kaye et al note that digital systems assign low importance to silos that
are irregular or difficult to categorise @kaye_money_2014. Individuals
are also shown to have varying degrees of awareness of finances they
manage (their own, or that of friends/family finances), and either
experience their finances through occasional glimpses, or through
tracking systems that they set up @kaye_money_2014. Vines et al note
that awareness of financial situations is characteristic of individuals
(or households) which have alow income, and propose design challenges
concerning the ability for systems to: allow users to delay or
prioritise payments

Opportunities
-------------

Summary {#sec:related:conclusion}
-------

Methodology {#sec:method}
===========

Introduction
------------

This chapter discusses and interrogates the methodologies, approaches,
and procedures used in the performance of the research project. It
begins by describing the methodological frameworks that informed the
project holistically via introducing the landscape in which the research
was performed; and reflects on how the research was organised
on-the-ground around this landscape. In doing this I reflect on how my
visions of participation going into the project required a degree of
reconfiguration in order to be reconciled with the realities of becoming
involved in the glorious, yet often erratic world, that is the Third
Sector.

Organising the Research {#sec:method:approach}
-----------------------

Section themes:

-   Is this AR?

-   PAR

-   UCD?

This section discusses how the research was organised around the
landscape it was performed in. I present a brief overview of the
organisations who participated in the research, and discuss how the
characteristics each of these required the research to be configured in
response.

### Research Landscape or ‘The Volcanic Soil of the Third Sector’

As discussed in Chapter 1, the Third Sector is a sector of economic
activity that is situated outside of both Government and For-Profit
contexts. The organisations that make up this sector come in an
inordinate amount of shapes, flavours, and structures but all share
important characteristics – they do not distribute profit to
shareholders, they are self-governing, and they do not coerce
participation in their activities (historically, at least). They are
generally seen as important actors in society; since their very
existence can be argued as a symptom of a market failure for both the
State and capitalist ventures to provide adequate solutions to hardships
of their beneficiaries. This is often manifested as an attendance to
matters such as grassroots development, and/or the provision of local
services which are generally understood to produce or sustain Social
Capital.

If we take the above as granted, then the importance of the Third Sector
to society at large is already fairly remarkable. During the period of
time described in the research, however, the UK has been in the throes
of a Conservative-lead policy of ‘Austerity’ for some time following
capitalism’s latest crisis (the 2008 crash). Government cuts have
resulted in the drastic reduction or death of many State-provided or
Local Government services in many contexts (Health and Social Care,
Youth and Play Work, Support Services, to name a few), which has in turn
resulted in Third Sector organisations such as Charities ‘picking up the
slack’ and providing services to communities themselves, often on behalf
of the same Local Government Organisations (Councils) that once provided
them in-house. This is often achieved by combining funding received from
partnership with the Councils with other funding sought from elsewhere.
At the same time, large amounts of funding are <span>*“drying
up”*</span> (as one participant put it) and charities are often
struggling to survive month-to-month.

This bears mentioning because the gravity of this situation became
apparent to me early on in my fieldwork, and all actions that I took
(particularly producing design interventions) would have real impacts on
the organisations I worked with. Given the current state of affairs, I
put forward that any and all research performed on, with, within, or
otherwise alongside Charities is akin to farming on volcanic soil.
Charities are often the focal point for community activity, and act as a
crucible in which the forces of change are reaching a critical
temperature and therefore research performed on this soil is intensively
fertile. The trade-off is that if one is researching without genuine
care for the fruits of their (and their collaborators’) labours; if they
are unaware of the pressures that they operate under — then they risk
having a severe and real impact on an organisation’s ability to perform
their work and in turn, sacrifice the lives of those caught in the
fallout.

The bulk of my research was performed with a small charity known as ‘The
Patchwork Project’ (Patchy, to the locals) in the West End of Newcastle
upon Tyne; an area known largely for suffering the regular tensions
related to economic deprivation and a high immigrant population. Patchy,
are a Youth Charity who cater their activities to those aged between
8-25. More can be read about them in Chapter 3, however my prolonged
involvement with them, especially in the early stages of research,
ensured that

Interactions, Work, and Labour: Approaches to Fieldwork and Analysis {#sec:method:fieldwork}
--------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ethnomethodological Orientation to Fieldwork

The goal of fieldwork in this research was to provide a corpus of data
that could be used to understand how those operating in the design space
(workers at charitable organisations) reasoned about their work, their
finances, and what role digital technologies played in this. Taking an
ethnomethodolgical orientation to the fieldwork allows the investigation
to focus on pragmatics of how accounting work is done in charities, how
members of these settings engage with each other accountably, and thus
how organisational Transparency and Accountability are, in turn, “done”
@crabtree_doing_2012 [@garfinkel_studies_1967]

Ethnomethodology concerns itself with how members of a social setting
organise and make sense of their social world; carring very little
commitment to particular epistemologies or ontologies excepting those
that are utilised on a mundane basis by the focus of its studies
@randall_fieldwork_2007 [@garfinkel_studies_1967]. Further to this, it
has been said, however, that Ethnomethodology <span>*“carries little or
no theoretical baggage”*</span> and consists of analytical choices as to
what the fieldworker attends to @randall_fieldwork_2007. Its focus on
how members of a setting construct their reality, however, gives it
attitudes rooted in Phenomenology’s description of the *Natural
Attitude* @sharrock_ethnomethodologists_1986.

Ethnomethodology has a variety of flavours, and has given rise to such
practices as Conversation Analysis . My fieldwork was focused on the
everyday practices of a setting and as such I consider it an instance of
an *ethnomethodological study of work*.

Following from this, ethnomethodology focuses on how the interactional
work performed by a setting’s members is made ‘accountable’ to others.

One notable feature of Ethnomethodology is the ‘indifference’ of
sociological dichotomies such as the question of objectivity vs
subjectivity, and instead insists that the fieldworker develop a *vulgar
competence* in a setting’s work to be able and describe it in the
language of the setting’s members @randall_fieldwork_2007
[@crabtree_doing_2012]. In doing so, this acknowledges how members of
the setting are producing and recognising their own contextual
structures; and how they are making them mutually intelligible or
naturally accountable to one another @garfinkel_studies_1967
[@randall_fieldwork_2007].

Finally, the relationship that ethnomethodologically-informed fieldwork
has to systems design contexts made it suitable for these enquiries.

### Taking a Marxist stance

The performance of the first large portion of fieldwork in the study,
beginning March 2016, overlapped with a series of events in my personal
life that began a pronounced interest in Marxism. This is worth
mentioning because the process resulted in engagment with a host of
classic, modern, and academic literatures. This had a subsequent effect
on my reading of fieldwork data with regards to labour relations of
workers, and helped shape the design of systems that were built in
response.

Marxism, and therefore Marxist stances, can be said to be concerned
primarily with the relationships between workers, their labour, capital,
and property @singer_marx:_2001 [@johnson_blackwell_2012]. The foci
offered by Marxism resonated with the research goals in as much as they
were set out to determine in what ways the work of charities related to
financial capital, and what role technology played in this relationship.
Taking a Marxist stance meant, to me, orienting myself to how the labour
of workers in charities was performed; how it was valued, and how it was
represented in the various types of formal and informal accounts
produced at the field site when accounting for activity or spending.

In Marxist theory, the work and value of any organisation, charities
included, is ultimately derived from the labour of its workers
@marx_contribution_1970. Classic political economy (e.g.
@smith_inquiry_1785) divides labour into the categories of *Productive
Labour* and *Unproductive Labour*. *Productive Labour* is labour that
directly goes into increasing the wealth of an organisation, whereas
*Unproductive Labour* is that which does not; but is nontheless
necessary for the organisation or nation to function
@smith_inquiry_1785. Marxism is famous for its critique of this
classical and arbitrary divide of the productive and unproductive forms
of labour; a critique that, in summary, attacks the notions of
*Productive* and *Unproductive* as having no neutral definition; as work
is not naturally productive and it takes work to make it so
@marx_capital_1974 [@marx_theories_1964]. Instead, what is seen as
*Productive* or *Unproductive* is in constant flux and based on a
multitude of different factors such as the mode of production[^1],
social class, and what the ‘product’ actually is @marx_capital_1974.
When studying charities, this makes sense — taking the classical
approach, it would seem as if the only thing within a charity that could
be called *Productive Labour* is the act of writing applications for
grants!

The Marxist stance on labour assisted in analysis of the fieldwork by
providing a framework within which I could reason about the findings.
Whilst ethnomethodology allowed for pragmatic insight into the
interactional work of the field site itself, Marxian critiques of labour
grounded these in what was needed to be captured to provide insight into
design work. Namely, if the distinction between *Productive* and
*Unproductive* Labour was based on an arbitrary dilineation, where was
that line drawn in the field site? How did participants reason about
what they classed as productive, and how was this accounted for to
themselves and others? With Marxism being so closely related to my
personal politics, I was initially apprehensive about taking this
analytical stance. This anxiety was at least partially assuaged when I
reflected upon findings of my previous study around charities and
transparency. This study discussed that tensions around transparency in
spending orbited around a focus on bottom line spending; leaving out the
effort (labour) of volunteers and underplaying importance of the labour
required of administrative tasks when discussing outcomes; therefore
emphasising the importance of accounting for the nature of workers’
labour in the field site and its relevance to design
@marshall_accountable:_2016.

In establishing the relationship between field notes from
Ethnomethodological studies and Marxism, it becomes necessary to
elaborate on the relationship between Marxism and Ethnomethodology
themselves. Chua explores Ethnomethodology from a Marxist perspective as
means in which ideological reproduction may be investigated, conceiving
of ideology as a symptom of social knowledge @chua_delineating_1977.
Ethnomethodology is described as a focus on investigating the rational
nature of a setting’s activities and thus providing an analytical tool
for Marxists to investigate how ideological systems operate as ‘natural’
ways of knowing and interpreting the world @chua_delineating_1977.
Freund and Abrams share this sentiment and examine Ethnomethodology’s
treatment of information and social perception as linked to the
practical interests of those producing them, therfore showing that
social perception and information produced by existing (and therefore
bourgeouis) institutions, is false @freund_ethnomethodology_1976. This
gives Ethnomethodology and Marxism important shared characteristicvs, as
both see social knowledge being bound to the contexts and methods that
produced them, as well as indicating that both perspectives fuse theory
and praxis @freund_ethnomethodology_1976. Chua elaborates that the
specificity and characteristic indifference of
Ethnomethodologically-informed studies means that results must be
appropriated within the wider context of Marxist sociology, but that
Marxists should otherwise encourage Ethnomethogological studies
@chua_delineating_1977. Conversely, investigating the relevance of Marx
to Ethnomethodology, Mehan and Wood associate Ethnomethodology with a
synthesis of both the hermeneutic-dialectial, and the logico-empiricist
traditions; that whilst the methodology of Ethnomethodology is firmly
rooted in logico-empricisim, its theory has derived from
hermeneutic-dialectics, and Ethnomethodology’s alienation as a method
stems from this transcendancy of its conflicting roots
@mehan_morality_1975. Marxism similarly straddles these realms,
simultaneously having its philosophical roots in Dialectics with the
development of Dialectical-Materialism, and possessing what is widely
regarded as a scientific approach to the investigation of social life
and political economy @thomas_marxism_2008. Also of note is the
similarity between Ethnomethodology’s attendence to practical action
@garfinkel_studies_1967 [@crabtree_doing_2012] and Marx’s thesis that
<span>*“All social life is essentially practical”*</span>
@marx_theses_1963. Indeed, Mehan and Wood argue that following the
conception of Ethnomethodology, Marx can be viewed as a
<span>*“crypto-ethnomethodologist”*</span> due to this
@mehan_morality_1975.

Beyond this, I feel that it is also important to consider that core
tenants of Ethnomethodology appear to be directly related to Marxist
stances on human labour. In Marxism, *Labour* is also described as *Life
Activity*; encompassing not only participation in economic activity, but
all acts that human beings undertake – from acts of recreation and love,
to tilling fields and designing software @marx_economic_1844
[@mitchell_i_2013]. It is therefore possible to conceive of the
*Interactional Work* attested to by Ethnomethodology
@garfinkel_ethnomethodological_2005 [@crabtree_doing_2012] as an
expression of *Labour* when viewed through a Marxist lense; and
reflexively adds the act of organising one’s social reality to the
definition of *Labour* as conceived of in this thesis.

Reflecting on the performance
-----------------------------

Accountability Work: Examining the Values, Technologies and Work Practices that Facilitate Transparency in Charities {#sec:emp01}
====================================================================================================================

**Note to readers: This is basically a ripped version of a paper that
was rejected from the ACM CHI conference. As such it currently refers to
itself as a paper and not a chapter. It also contains a background
section and methods section, which need to change. It just needs to be
in here so that I begin to work on it**

This paper discusses the role of data technologies in Charitable
Organisations (charities) as they seek to become transparent and
accountable in their work and their financial practices. Charities play
an important role in society, oftentending to issues of importance to
populations and communities where both the private and state sectors
have lacked engagement (or resources) @salamon_rise_1994. Due to the
nature of much of their funding, through grants and public donations,
charities are required to demonstrate to stakeholders both a commitment
to their aims and a competency in their financial practices
@macmillan_relationship_2005 [@oliver_what_2004]. Data technologies play
an increasingly important role in mediating transparency for
organisations by supporting the online reporting and publishing of
financial data @meijer_understanding_2009, while the production of open
data is widely claimed to be synonymous with transparency in dialogues
around government and business @coleman_lessons_2013
[@goldstein_open_2013; @gordon_making_2013]. Recent work within HCI has
examined the use of open data by charities for constructing narratives
@erete_storytelling_2016, the use of data for metrics for reporting and
understanding @elsden_resviz:_2016, and has provided insight into how
digital systems can provide more comprehensive forms of transparency in
these organisations @marshall_accountable:_2016. However, thus far there
is little understanding of how technologies like these, and more
commonplace data technologies, and data work, integrate into the daily,
lived, work of charities.

Our research sets out to address this deficit and better understand how
transparency and accountability manifest in the daily activities of
charities. We conducted a qualitative study of work practice in a
charity that conducts youth work for economically deprived and migrant
communities in the North of England. Over a period of 7 months the first
author spent an average of 2 days a week conducting ethnographic
fieldwork at the charity’s main community hub and office, and
participated in both delivery of community-facing activities and
administrative work. The fieldwork was oriented towards developing a
praxeological account of how financial work is performed within the
organisation @crabtree_doing_2012. The findings from our fieldwork
provide insight into the tools and processes used by members of such a
setting to organise and make sense of their activities and finances and,
more crucially, the work that is required to make this *transparent* and
*accountable* to others. We also discuss the tensions that exist between
the everyday execution of charitable work and the legal or contractual
obligations to account for it in particular ways. In doing so we
highlight how organisations can navigate these issues in order to make
themselves accountable not only ‘on paper’ but to those who rely on the
charity’s projects and services.

This work contributes to the field of HCI in two ways. First, we produce
an account of a charity’s work practices as they relate to data
technologies, financial transparency, and accountability. In doing this
we extend HCI’s discussion of technologies and organisational
accountability @marshall_accountable:_2016 by illuminating how this
relates to the lived practice of those whose work these technologies
will impact. Secondly, in discussing the tensions that exist in these
settings, we extend current work in HCI around sharing data for
sensemaking, human-data interaction and organisational transparency, by
presenting a set of design recommendations for future systems. In doing
so, we discuss how HCI can affect real change in charities worldwide by
facilitating engagement with their work’s value, and communicating this
to others.

Background and Related Work
---------------------------

It is generally understood that charities play an important role in
society. They perform work in areas and matters generally left
unattended by state or private sectors. This includes driving
grass-roots development and human services @salamon_rise_1994, the
creation and sustenance of social capital within communities and for
particularly marginalised populations. *Social Capital*
@field_social_2003 [@mendel_doing_2014]. It can be said that a charity’s
very existence indicates a substantial need for its model of service
delivery, due to the failure of the market to regulate for-profit
entities which may engage in potentially harmful or exploitative
practices@hansmann_role_1980.

The importance of their role and their funding mechanisms makes
accountability a cornerstone in the public’s relationship with
Charities. This is for, at least, two reasons. First, due to the
important role that charities play in society, making an organisation
accountable for actions it takes ensures that it is true to its mission
and do not abuse the trust of the public and other stakeholders who
might support its cause @frumkin_accountability_2006
[@jacobson_lifting_2005]. Second, due to the fact that charities are
often funded with grants from private or public funds, it is argued that
they should be held accountable and act transparently in regards to
their financial practices. This is to ensure that they are seen to be
using funds both appropriately and efficaciously. Furthermore, due to
the nature of charitable funding, this means having multiple and diverse
stakeholders to which they must be accountable
@krashinsky_stakeholder_1997 [@macmillan_relationship_2005].

There are multiple ways in which an organisation can be said to be
accountable. This can include: the extent to which its stakeholders can
direct its activity @koppell_pathologies_2005; how it can be called upon
to justify its actions @fox_uncertain_2007; and how it can be made to
adhere to responsibilities through legal frameworks
@koppell_pathologies_2005. These theories of accountability have impact
on the way that charities conduct their everyday operations regarding
work and spending. Accountability shares a complicated relationship with
financial transparency; the latter often being cited as means to provide
the former @hood_accountability_2010. Koppell describes transparency as
the foundational element for accountability upon which all of the other
forms are built @koppell_pathologies_2005. Fox conceptualises an
intersection between the two called ‘answerability’ @fox_uncertain_2007.
For organisations there are many ways to be transparent such as
passiveley revealing information or actively engaging stakeholders
@oliver_what_2004 [@schauer_transparency_2011], or choosing to focus on
outcomes or spend @heald_varieties_2006. The position of this paper is
that all forms of transparency share a concern over the dissemination
and consumption of information. The purpose of being transparent,
therefore, is ultimately to facilitate interactions between an
organisation, its work, and stakeholders (such as funders or the wider
public). These interactions are what mediate accountability, and these
interactions are increasingly facilitated digitally
@meijer_understanding_2009 [@oliver_what_2004].

The ideals and beleifs surrounding use of data and personal informatics
has seen the field of HCI explore the politics and design of systems
that facilitate interactions with data. At an organisational level,
studies have demonstrated how charities have used open data to form
narratives around local conditions @erete_storytelling_2016, while
others have highlighted how visualisations around organisational metrics
(including funding) support the use of data for reporting,
understanding, and providing insight in highly politicised environments
@elsden_resviz:_2016. In the personal sphere, concepts of data lockers
allow external processors to interact with one’s data while maintaining
personal control @mcauley_dataware_2011 and data itself is likened to a
boundary object forming part of the infrastructure of everyday life
@crabtree_human_2015.

Modern transparency efforts often legally stipulate that charities and
other NPOs submit documentation for auditing and subsequent public
consumption. Examples include the US’ Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
@internal_revenue_service_annual_2016 and the UK’s Charity Commission
@hm_government_charity_????. The focus of these systems is typically on
*input* (i.e. the money a charity spends). This is, in part, due to its
ease of measurement; however such input transparencies
@heald_varieties_2006 have been shown to be ineffective when determining
how appropriate a spend is. Previous work in HCI has critiqued such
systems for lacking detail and context about the work of organisations,
and failing to represent non-monetary elements such as the efforts of
those who volunteer for a charity’s projects and cause. The
recommendations from this prior work are for new digital systems and
processes that provide a more comprehensive and value-driven alternative
to simple financial accounting @marshall_accountable:_2016.
Additionally, imposed or expected transparency measures are often seen
to be in conflict with effective practice with regards to organisational
independence, confidentiality, and privacy @cukierman_limits_2009
[@schauer_mixed_2014]. In this way, the concerns of charities around
transparency touch upon personal concerns around privacy that are
addressed by McAuley et al.’s Dataware Manifesto @mcauley_dataware_2011
as charities wish to communicate an accurate view of their work and its
value but may have concerns presenting data about activity or spend that
can be misinterpreted by others who may not understand its context.
Furthermore, on a lived and pragmatic level, ‘being transparent’ can
create additional work for organisations due to the effort involved in
performing audits, monitoring and reporting that they are legally or
conractually obliged to. It also means charities have to expend further
effort to communicate their practice and value (as opposed to values) in
order to maintain a relationship with their stakeholders
@macmillan_relationship_2005.

The work reported in this paper builds upon previous studies in HCI
around the design of systems to facilitate transparency and
accountability in charities @marshall_accountable:_2016, and work that
discusses the use of data for interaction by and between individuals and
organisations @crabtree_human_2015 [@elsden_resviz:_2016]. Where
previous work investigates the design for interfaces to interact with
data, or the ownership and processing of the same, it typically fails to
account for the work needed in organisations to compile this data in the
first place. As such, our research set out to ask: how is work performed
and money spent; how is this accounted for in a charity?; and what are
the processes that make this available to others? In asking and
examining these questions through ethographic fieldwork, this research
seeks to provide insights around the ways in which digital systems can
be designed to facilitate the work of ‘being transparent’ as part of
everyday practice in charities.

Study Design
------------

Our fieldwork was conducted over a period of seven months with a small
charity in the UK based in the city of \[anonymous for peer review\];
Pallet (a pseudonym for the purposes of reporting the research). The
organisation has three full-time and four part-time staff
(Table \[tab:participants\]), and an average financial turnover of
approximately 130k. Pallet are a youth organisation that perform work
with young people aged between 8 and 25 years in a catchment area
typically seen as experiencing tensions related to economic deprivation
and a high immigrant population. The participating organisation was
approached due to a recommendation of a collaborator who represents the
third-sector across the entire region; Pallet were presented as an
organisation who have a significant presence in their community, whose
work is value-driven, and are exemplar of small charities with flexible
funding. They were also presented as being enthusiastic about becoming
involved in research of this subject and scope.

Fieldwork and data collection were primarily ethnographic in nature
@crabtree_doing_2012, formed of participatory-observation activities at
Pallet. This involved shadowing, assisting with accounts preparation,
and interviewing members of staff, volunteers, and service users
in-situ. Near the conclusion of fieldwork three workshops were conducted
that acted as an opportunity for members of the organisation to engage
in checking and elaborating on the emerging insights of our fieldwork,
as well as stimulating further reflection on their practices and their
use of data and technologies.

  ---------- ------------ -------------------- ------------------------------
  **Name**   **Gender**   **Pay Scheme**       **Role(s)**
  Mike       M            Full-Time Employee   Manager
  Andi       F            Full-Time Employee   Senior Youth Worker
  Dean       M            Full-Time Employee   Youth Worker
  Chelsea    F            Part-Time Employee   Adminitrator (pre-July)
  Lynne      F            Part-Time Employee   Admistrator (July - present)
  Sonia      M            Part-Time Employee   Youth Worker
  Ladislav   M            Part-Time Employee   Youth Worker (pre-August)
  ---------- ------------ -------------------- ------------------------------

  : Participant Details<span data-label="tab:participant"></span>

### Ethnography

Our ethnographic work began in early 2016. Initially, the fieldwork came
in the form of weekly visits by the lead author to Pallet in order to
participate in their daily administrative and planning sessions. At this
time, visits were targeted to coincide with the shifts of the part-time
administrator so that the lead author could engage with their work as
well as that of other staff members.

After three such visits, fieldwork expanded to include participating in
the organisation’s work as a volunteer youth worker on a weekly basis.
This further facilitated the lead author’s integration into the charity,
and provided opportunities to participate in and observe Pallet
performing their work in the community in order to develop a deeper
understanding of their practices. Through this participant-observation,
the lead author was able to develop a vulgar competence
@crabtree_doing_2012 of organisational processes from which to learn
from and reflect upon. At this point, vists became more frequent and
occurred several times a week with days being spent partly participating
in administration and planning, and partly in the performance of a
volunteer role in community sessions and projects.

During this time at the organisaiton the author was given a range of
duties to perform such as: everyday purchasing of equipment for
activities; attending meetings of stakeholders; being involved in
strategy meetings with partners; the creation of monitoring materials
such as questionnaires; and reconciling financial accounts. The author
was also given copies of the yearly accounts spreadsheets to inspect at
leisure, with instruction to ask any questions as required. Informal
interviews often occured in-situ, either when the researcher desired
clarification of an activity as it occured in-the-moment, or when
reflection on fieldnotes lead to a question which could only be answered
by the settings members. These informal interviews were not
audio-recorded, although integrated into the data corpus through
fieldnotes and fieldwork diaries.

The seven-month ethnography comprised 49 unique visits and engagement in
27 volunteering activities. Some 70 pages of fieldnotes and fieldwork
diaries were generated, and elaborated on with discussions with settings
members, as activities occured.

### Workshops

In the final stages of our fieldwork, a series of three workshops were
conducted with workers at Pallet. During the first workshop, four staff
members and one volunteer staff participated. Only three of the staff
were available for the second workshop. However all four participated in
the final workshop, alongside one trustee of the organisation.

The purpose of these workshops was to provide a setting in which the
workers could reflect further on their practices as an organisation and
discuss the role that technologies and data play, and might play in the
future, in the daily operations of the charity. The workshops were also
an opportunity for members to check the preliminary insights from our
fieldwork, and to offer further elaboration on specific points. In
total, three workshops were run at three-to-four week intervals. The
workshops each lasted an average of 105 minutes, with the first being
slightly longer than the subsequent two due to the personal schedules of
participants. All workshops were audio-recorded (with permission) and
written transcripts were produced.

The first workshop was designed to elicit reflection on how the
organisation communicated its spending and activities internally as well
as with stakeholders. Participants engaged in a collaborative process
using common office materials (e.g. corkboards, post-its) to build up a
rich picture @monk_methods_1998 of Pallet and its ecosystem. First
participants noted individual elements of their processes including:
staff; stakeholders; assets and resources; government bodies; funders;
and beneficiaries. Participants notably chose to represent these
elements on a loose spectrum from <span>*“inside \[Pallet\]”*</span> to
<span>*“outside \[Pallet\]”*</span>. Once these elements had been added,
the researcher prompted discussion of information flows around Pallet
between different elements, using examples derived from fieldwork. These
were captured on the rich picture using coloured string and map pins to
represent different flows and activities. After some time doing this,
the researcher moved the discussion to the flows of financial capital.
This portion of the workshop followed a similar process, using examples
derived from fieldwork to prompt reflection on these flows, again which
participants mapped onto the rich picture using coloured string and
pins. Finally, the session concluded with a targeted reflection on
tension points the participants felt were identified in the workshop.

The second workshop had the purpose of exploring in further depth the
relationship between the participants and data about the organisation’s
finances and work practice. In this workshop, participants were first
given nine scenarios written by the lead author, which imagined a
variety of potential interactions with data about the organisation’s
activities. The participants chose to read each scenario aloud in turn,
and discuss each one before moving to the next. After each scenario was
discussed (approx 60 minutes in total), the participants were asked to
design their own vision for supporting accountability and transparency
in the organisation. Participants were told that their designs did not
need to be technologically feasible, and could resemble ‘magic buttons’
to do what they wanted. Participants, again, opted for a group dynamic
where they spent a brief time sketching or writing, and then discussing
the ideas in depth between each other and the researcher.

The third workshop was designed to allow participants to build further
on the concepts that they’d discussed in the previous workshops. Based
on a design brief given by the facilitator, participants used
commonplace materials to construct ‘magic machines’ that an imagined
future version of Pallet would use to perform tasks related to
transparency and accountability. After approximately 45 minutes of
building individual machines, workers took turns to explain them through
demonstrating their use around the setting (the charity’s main office).
Here they would physically take the researcher and other participants to
areas in which the machine was imagined to operate as they elaborated on
its functions and their interactions with it.

Findings
--------

Our findings are compiled from field notes and diaries collected during
the lead researcher’s immersion at the organisation, as well as
transcripts from the audio recordings made during workshop events. These
were used to develop praxeological accounts of work @crabtree_doing_2012
around the organisaiton’s activities related to producing accounts of
their work, both financial and otherwise.

The findings presented here are grouped based on the activities they
relate to: Accounts of Finances; Accounts of Outcomes; and Accounts of
Unproductive Labour. *Unproductive Labour* here refers to the effort
required by the workers of the charity to make their work productive
@marx_contribution_1970, and we concern ourselves not only with how this
is performed but how this is accounted for and communicated to others.

### Accounting for Spending

Spending from funded projects occurs on an everyday basis for things
that are required to achieve the charity’s immediate outcomes and goals,
as well as having core costs such as staff salaries and bills which are
paid through other processes. In this section we describe how the
charity account for everyday spending, staff and core costs, as well as
what is involved in producing ‘the accounts’ required by legal
processes.

#### Everyday Spending

One of the first things we observed during fieldwork is that everyday
spending is accounted for internally by instituting a system of
funelling all spend through two senior members of staff. Chelsea, the
charity’s part-time administrator, described this in the fieldwork:

**Chelsea** <span>*“The staff get paid back through expenses, and only
Mike and Andi are allowed to make expenses claims which they’ll make
generally when they notice their bank accounts are getting low”*</span>.

Chelsea here indicates that Mike and Andi use their personal bank
accounts to make purchases for the organisation in order to ensure that
any expenses made can be deemed appropriate. That they only claim for
expenses when they <span>*“notice their bank accounts are geting
low”*</span> also indicates that there is a practice of storing records
of these transactions in order to compile them and reimburse the
spender. We also observed that although all spending must be funelled
through either Andi or Mike, often other staff members made purchases as
part of their everyday work. This occurs in one of two ways, both of
which we describe in a vignette below, which describes events occurring
over two days of fieldwork:

*I had been called to help with the planning and execution of the
‘Community Activity Day’ at the Play Centre. The day itself was taking
place on the first of June, but I was participating in the planning on
the day before. After I had arrived, Sonia and I were tasked with
producing a grocery list for an outdoor BBQ that was occuring as part of
the day. After a quick discussion regarding items for the menu, we
needed to come up with quantities. I asked Sonia what the expected turn
out was and she said “Probably at least 70”. We agreed to plan for
around 80 attendees and proceeded to leave the centre towards the
supermarket, where we were approached on the side of the road by Mike in
the minibus. He asks us if we’re “off to buy food”, and when Sonia
replies that we are he says “Here, take this” and hands his debit card
over, before asking Sonia “Do you know the PIN?”. She nods affirmatively
and Mike chuckles before saying to me “Aye. Half of \[district area\]
know that PIN now” and driving off. When we are in the supermarket,
Sonia and I traverse it looking for the items we need — Sonia makes a
point to purchase the cheapest possible store-brand products, searching
for them on the shelves and looking frustrated when none appear
available. When I ask if it’s possible to get one of the others she
tells me “We can’t be seen to be buying brands really”. After we have
everything in the basket, we purchase it using Mike’s card. Back at the
project hub, Mike returns around an hour later during lunch and
retrieves his card and the receipt of purchase from Sonia, checking over
it briefly before putting it in his wallet.*

*On the day of the ‘Community Activity Day’ I was walking towards the
Play Centre in order to volunteer my labour, when Mike pulled up in the
minibus heading in the opposite direction (at speed). He stops only to
hand me 20 and tells me “We need \[toilet roll\] for the Play Centre. Go
get some from \[convenience store\] across the road, the big cheap pack
at the back of the shop” before driving off. I turn around, find the
store and make the purchase, and then make my way to the Play Centre.
Inside, the Play Centre is already full of activity with adults and
children moving around. I find Andi and hand her the money, which she
takes and asks for a receipt. I find the receipt in my pocket and hand
it to her and she stores it together with Mike’s change in her back
pocket before assigning me my role for the day.*

This vignette first illustrates the ways in which spending is funeled
through the senior staff whilst allowing the organisation to distribute
the labour of purchasing by devolving responsibility for the physical
purchase. Sonia is handed Mike’s debit card so that it is *his money*
that is spent, and this acts as a buffer between the member of staff and
the organisation’s finances. This buffer is also present when Mike hands
cash to the researcher so that they can participate in spending. Further
to this, that Mike checks the receipt, and Sonia’s awareness of not
wishing to be <span>*“seen to be buying brands”*</span> shows a checking
process that means that Sonia may have to justify purchases to Mike if
called upon. This also shows that the staff involved in purchasing are
aware of the charity’s overall budget and tailor their purchases to
ensure it’s appropriate; also seen when Mike explicitly provides the
lead author with instructions to purchase <span>*“the big cheap
pack”*</span> of toilet roll.

#### Staff Salaries

Table \[tab:participants\] lists the staff at Pallet. There are three
full-time staff: Mike, the manager; Andi, the senior youth worker; and
Dean, a youth worker. The three part-time staff are: Lynne, the
administrator (replacing Chelsea who had the role at the start of
fieldwork); Ladislav, a youth worker; and Sonia, a youth worker. When
ethnography started, the administrator role was performed by Chelsea.

During discussion with Chelsea at the start of fieldwork, we discussed
with her how staff are salaried at the organisation:

**Chelsea:** <span>*“Dean and Andi get paid full time, I get paid
part-time for about 16 hours a week. Mike works full-time but he’s only
paid part-time.”*</span>

Chelsea lists several of the staff and their pay-schemes, but noticeably
says here that Mike is working full time but only paid for part of his
work, indicating that his salary is variable even though his role is
central to the organisation. During a subsequent fieldwork session, Mike
elaborated on this when asked:

<span>*“It’s what’s best for \[Pallet\]. We have to keep things going. I
don’t care how much I get paid, and it’s money that I have to end up
looking for. I put the salaries down for the last few years, and it took
a while to put Dean up to 20,000 when he started because the money just
wasn’t there. What with the Lottery Fund coming in now we can start
thinking about putting the salaries back to normal.”*</span>

Mike’s discussion of the staff accepting lower pay provides insight into
the values of the organisation. The staff are dedicated to the
organisation’s work, and are aware of their impact on its finances;
accepting lower pay in order to <span>*“keep things going”*</span>.
Where Mike discusses having to look for the money to pay staff, he also
touches upon how an increase in pay creates an increase in labour as he
is required to expend effort sourcing funds to make up the difference.
Further into fieldwork, Mike provides additional insight into this
during discussion about staff salaries and standard pay increases amid
the adjusted salaries:

**Mike:** *“So we’re putting the salaries up starting next month which
is a big relief for everyone. I’ll be on 30k, but not really because
that means more tax so you have to judge it carefully. Because of the
tax brackets, past a certain point it makes no sense to give me a pay
increase because of how much it’ll cost. What is an extra hundred to me
per week will be several thousand a year to the charity which I then
have to find and justify finding. This way everyone still sees their pay
increase, including me, but I’m not too worried about finding the extra
cash. It’s still the least you’ll ever see another project manager get
paid round here though. Some of the larger organisations have six or
seven heads on about 100k so that’s like nearly a million you need
before you even get anything done.”*

This again shows Mike’s awareness of the staff salaries having an impact
on the organisation; he is willing to keep his salary lower than that of
comparable positions in the area (<span>*“round here”*</span>) and
demonstrates that he would need to justify to others a pay increase that
required searching for a disproportionate amount of further funding.
Mike also mentions how the staff will be relieved that the salaries are
being brought in line with standard pay rises; illustrating that the
salary cuts have tangible effects on staff and further defining their
position as a value-driven cohort. When Mike discusses the salaries of
larger organisations he also reveals his views on what money and people
are supposed to do in an organisation; they are supposed to be put
towards the work of the organisation and paying head staff large
salaries creates extra work and financial pressure <span>*“before you
even get anything done”*</span>.

#### Compiling Accounts

All of the organisation’s income and spending must be accounted for
formally through the compilation of ‘the accounts’; records of financial
transactions that must be reconciled, audited and presented to governing
bodies. This compilation of accounts was one of the activities we
involved ourselves in during fieldwork, generally performed alongside
the administrator (Chelsea, and later Lynne). When being initially
instructed in the task by Mike, we were given insight into the role of
financial accounts in the organisation and what is involved in the task:

**Mike:** <span>*“We have this budgeting tool. It’s an Excel spreadsheet
really, do you know Excel? Anyway this Australian lad who used to work
for us set it up, we can add funders and add spending and stuff and we
can use it to see how much we have left in each budget. At the end of
each financial year this gets sent to the accountant so they can sign it
off for us.”*</span>

This example encapsulates how the organisation views using the
spreadsheet when doing budgeting; Mike refers to it explicitly as a
tool, with which he can present an account of the organisation’s budget
to himself, and can be used to generate another account to others (one
which is legally stipulated). We did, however, witness that there are
often tensions arising from Pallet’s use of their spreadsheet. We
describe this in a vignette below:

*It was the start of the day and we were having a scrum, after everyone
says their job for the day Mike asks to speak to me about doing
something with the Patchwork accounts. “I’m not happy with the
accountants at the moment, they’re being problematic”. I ask why and he
responds that “They just want us to use Sage \[business accounting
software\], do you know Sage?” I respond that I don’t, and Mike
continues “The accountants don’t like that we don’t use Sage, and I
think that’s because they can just import it and have it do their job
for them.”*

Here Mike shows us that there is an explicit point of contention between
Pallet and their accountants when the accounts are audited. Pallet have
developed an in-house tool that allows them to present an account of
spend to themselves and others. Yet because the file cannot be read by
the accountant’s software then this makes it incomprehensible to them.
Mike then elaborates and tells us how the accountants are trying to
influence Pallet’s practice to suit their own, and postulates that it is
to reduce the labour of the accountant. That Mike starts by telling us
that he’s <span>*“not happy with the accountants”*</span> shows that he
feels that the organisation have fulfilled their obligation to produce
an account of their spending. Further insight to this was provided
during later fieldwork, when the researcher attended a trustee’s
meeting, and it came to discuss the accounts:

**Mike:** <span>*“We’re thinking of scrapping \[accountants\]. They’ve
upped the price to 1300, which nobody around the doors is happy with by
the way, and they’re trying to force us to use Sage so we do their job
for them. We’ve spoken to a woman we found on \[a listing\] who says
she’ll do it for 20 an hour and she’s happy to do them in whatever
format we want. She’s been in and looked already and she’s told us that
we’ve already done the job, and all she’ll need to do is double-check a
few things and sign it off. We have to make sure she’s got the right,
y’know, qualifications, to do that but aye it looks much
better.”*</span>

This extract shows us that Pallet are willing to seek other accountants
to perform the task who are more suited as partners as they might cost
the charity less money for their services but more importantly are
flexible and accepting of Pallet’s accounts regardless of format.
Additionally, when Mike discusses both the price increase in reference
to other organisations (<span>*“nobody around the doors is happy with by
the way”*</span>) and checking the new accountant’s qualifications, he
also demonstrates how they view their relationship; the accountant must
become accountable to them and the other charities that the accountant
works with). This holds true for the current accountant in terms of
their service cost, and the potential new accountant having the correct
qualifications for the job.

### Accounting for Outcomes

As well as having to account for their financial spending, Pallet also
produce records of their outcomes which they demonstrate to others. We
saw many examples of this during fieldwork, and present an account of
one here:

*During a community play session in the park, I saw that Andi was often
taking photographs using her phone. Whenever she wasn’t actively engaged
with young people, she would navigate to the others in the group and
attempt to take a photograph of them; often to a mixed response from the
young people themselves. Several of the group were very willing to be
photographed, usually the young Slovak boys who took up exaggerated
masculine poses such as scowling or muscle flexion. Others were more
reserved, and stipulated that they only be photographed alongside the
others, so that they were not the sole subject of the picture. Whenever
possible, Andi would call to another youth worker such as Dean or
Ladislav and ask them to get into the photograph as well. I am
photographed with young people several times. The next morning, when I
wake up, I have been tagged in photographs by Pallet’s Facebook account
and see that most of the workers have also been tagged as well as the
majority of young people in the photographs.*

Andi’s behaviour shows her producing a qualitative record of the event
and activity that occured. She can be seen collecting photographic
evidence of their attendance in-situ, as well as using the setting to
elaborate on the context of their work. The practice of uploading these
to a social media profile produces an account of their activity for
others to see, and the tagging of people in the photographs on the
platform encourages those tagged to look at them and potentially allows
others (such as parents) to glimpse the activity as well. As well as on
social media, Pallet print out a selection of photographs in a poster
format, which are displayed around their main community hub. The workers
reflected on this practice in the first workshop:

**Andi:** <span>*“... part of it’s capturing that moment in time because
it’s gonna be gone. Y’know, and it would be very easy for them to forget
\[...\] So you’re capturing it for them, you’re capturing it for their
parents to see what they’ve achieved, or for the Duke of Edinburgh so
they can prove whatever it is they’ve done. You’re putting on the wall
as a celebration, you’re putting it in the annual report for funders to
see and also for young’uns to see \[...\] Like loads of kids will be
like ‘will this be going on the wall?’.”*</span>

**Mike:** <span>*“I mean we dunno we just take lots of pictures because
it becomes a resource for us as well. So the ones on the wall are of the
D of Es because they’re positive images. Sitting down two people and
talking one to one and that — it’s not very entertaining.”*</span>

We see here how the organisation use a resource bank of records built up
by photographs for different types of accounts, to different people.
Andi relates how the photographs she takes can explicitly be used as
evidence for the young people’s involvement in the *Duke of Edinburgh*
award, whereas Mike conceptualises them as <span>*“positive
images”*</span> and a resource for the organisation’s future needs. Andi
also explicates how the photographs are shown to parents in order to
provide an account of their child’s activity (achievement) with Pallet.
As well as this, we see how the photographs are repurposed to provide an
account of value in the annual report, and to provide a personal record
for the young people when it’s placed on the wall in
<span>*“celebration”*</span>. The ability for these records to form a
resource from which different accounts can be derived also sits in
contrast to other forms of work that Pallet perform that, as Mike
indicates here, are more difficult to account for (<span>*“Sitting down
two people and talking one to one and that — it’s not very
entertaining”*</span>). We observed this first-hand during fieldwork
when Mike expressed frustration at the records that Pallet are required
to keep of their meetings with service-users, and how it is difficult to
present these to others:

*I followed Mike through to the back office, and up to a large metal
filing cabinet that was unlabelled. He opened it and took out a folder
to show me an example, flicking through saying “Here. This is a
monitoring form we have to fill out every time we have a chat with
someone. You say who it was, what you chatted about and what the
outcomes were. Standard ticky-box stuff. We’re meant to keep this, and
we do by the way, but nobody ever asks to see it. I’ve got files here
from ten year ago which haven’t seen the light of day. And people
complain at us that we’re not doing our job and ticking boxes and we
are, but nobody ever comes in. Nobody ever asks.”*

Mike’s frustration indicates that although he is fulfilling legal and
stipulated obligations designed to make them accountable for their work,
they are not given an opportunity to actually do so. When Mike describes
above that photographs of these chats would be <span>*“not very
entertaining”*</span> we also see that whilst Pallet could theoretically
generate records of these to show to others, the effort required to do
so would not result in a substantial gain for the charity when trying to
demonstrate their value.

#### Accountability inside and outside of work

We found that the workers at Pallet saw themselves as being accountable
both in their roles as youth workers, but also as members of the
community. This is characterised by Dean’s conception of accountability
during discussion in the second workshop:

**Dean:** <span>*“Then there’s the visibility in and out of work. It’s
not a one-way thing, I’m not Dean the youth worker during the day and
I’m not Darts-Dean at night I’m both and I’ve got to be very aware that
young people and the families that I work with, \[...\], I live in the
same area as them and they are watching me constantly. In \[Pallet\] and
out. I’ve got to be visible. It’s... an awareness of your role within
the community. And I think another one for me, being accountable is
remaining humble and just thinking that I’m very much where I’ve come
from and I’m very like the young people I work with and they know my
family.”*</span>

With this, Dean shows us how he sees his role in the community by living
and working in the same area. Dean provides a view that accountability
for his actions as a youth worker is lived in each moment. He is
constantly watched by those around him, even when outside of work during
his recreation activities and can therefore be seen as a whole, rather
than only through a lens of his output at Pallet.

### Accounting for Unproductive Labour

Unproductive labour is the labour required to perform the work to
achieve the outcomes for the charity. In other words it is the work
needed to make work productive @marx_contribution_1970. In this context
it refers to the additional effort expended by workers at the charity in
addition to what the task demands in-the-moment. An example would be the
planning required to execute a community session ahead of the labour
required by session as it occurrs. We found that accounting for
unproductive labour in the organisation occurs only as the labour itself
occurs, during meetings, or discussions about activities and planning —
and that it is rare for those outside of the organisation and immediate
community to be made aware of this labour. This is often complicated by
the organisation’s open-door policy, which requires that they respond
directly to community members coming through the door for their services
or informal chats. This particularly came to the fore in one discussion
during fieldwork:

*The workers were sitting down at the central table, discussing another
youth project that operated elsewhere in the city. Pallet have recently
acquired a Play Centre and are in the process of finding ways to use it
most effectively, and so have been visiting other charities to learn
from them. It’s mentioned that the other project in question produce
elaborate and planned evenings of activities for all attendees at their
centre whereas Pallet wouldn’t consider that. Dean sits up straight and
exclaims “They’ve got the time they don’t start until half four! As soon
as that shutter goes up we have work to do!” As he says this he gestures
with his pen at the large window towards the front of the room, where
Pallet’s hub faces the street. The rest of the group at the meeting nod
silently in agreement*

Dean is primarily discussing how Pallet’s work cannot be judged against
that of another organisation with different working patterns. He also
makes reference to the open door policy and its effect on their working
day regarding planning. He also makes clear that these informal meetings
are conceived of as ‘work’; there is effort expended when conversing
that prevents them from performing other tasks. These conversations must
be engaged in because they also form an important part of how Pallet
organise their work. This was discussed during the first workshop:

**Mike:** <span>*“Aye it’s the Youth Worker, the Young People as well as
it starts and it’s an outcome from the process of that conversation
really. But it can be other things”*</span>

**Andi:** <span>*“So aye, \[anon\] is a good example. \[...\] I know he
was doing football, I knew he was doing work experience so he’d have the
time and you just think well it would be really good for him to do it
for his future. Y’know, so having a conversation with him to say look
are you interested in this \[...\].”*</span>

This shows how the process of engaging in conversations that arise from
the open door policies can translate to outcomes, in this case a
beneficiary getting a work experience placement based around a hobby.
This qualifies Dean’s earlier utterance that the organisation has
<span>*“work to do”*</span> as soon as they start: these conversations
are labour that must occur for Pallet to achieve its goals effectively,
but it’s difficult to provide an account of this work to others. During
fieldwork, Mike related another anecdote that illustrates how outsiders
are often surprised at the *labour* required to perform everyday tasks
and achieve outcomes:

<span>*“It’s like when this guy from \[a funder\] came in to check. Most
funders don’t and they don’t understand us. He came in and he loved it.
He said that he was amazed we could keep the place running, we had so
much going on around here that we deal with on a daily basis.”*</span>

From this we also see that Mike understands the difficulty of accounting
for this labour to others — most funders do not visit and thus do not
understand how the project functions. The funder is also amazed at the
everyday work that occurs and was surprised at the effort being
expended; which shows that this labour is not represented to them
through other means and becomes accounted for only when there are others
there to produce their own account.

#### Inferring Unproductive Labour

We mentioned that unproductive labour is generally only accounted for by
those performing it as it occurred. However we saw during fieldwork that
unproductive labour can often be inferred by other records that are
either kept by workers or produced as a by-product of their activity:

*I was participating in a planning session for the evening’s activities
which was initiated when Dean and Andi each took out large workbooks and
opened them. Andi asks “Where’s Mike?”, to which Dean responds that he
is “down the allotment”. Andi looks puzzled at this and Dean elaborates,
“He’s seeing how Liam’s getting on” and turns the notebook to show Andi.
On it there is a task list which shows ‘allotment’. Andi looks at this,
and nods.*

This illustrates how records kept by workers can be used to infer the
activity and thus the work of others in the organisation. The list
offers proof of Mike’s whereabouts that Andi accepts as canonical, yet
only the word ‘allotment’ is written. This tells us that, generally,
there is labour that is performed at the allotment and that Mike can be
found performing it. In addition to this we see that, in addition to
being necessary for financial accounting, receipts can also be used to
infer the labour of others:

*Mike was having lunch and moving items from the tabletop out of his
way, so that he could place his laptop there and write a report. When
moving a pile of paper he turns to inspect it and finds a receipt,
saying aloud “What’s this? Ohh. It’s the pancake stuff for tonight;
Sonia’s been shopping.”*

From the receipt Mike can recognise that the items are a list of
ingredients to make pancakes, an activity commonly run by the charity.
He also infers that there has been an expense of labour in acquiring
these materials when he says <span>*“Sonia’s been shopping”*</span>, and
can attribute this to Sonia by other mechanisms that he is privy to.

#### Hidden Unproductive Labour

As discussed, unproductive labour is necessary for the subsequent
performance of activities that translate to outcomes. Whilst most of
this labour can be inferred by the activity, or made visible to others
through things such as task-lists, some of it cannot as it takes a form
that doesn’t lend itself to recording. We illustrate this with a
vignette of activity in the organisation leading up to a scheduled
evening activity:

*I was due to participate in an evening session with a group referred to
by the workers as the ‘Slovak Lasses’ group. This group was comprised of
young Slovak women aged between 15 and 24. The ‘sessions’ all run from
1600 approx until about 1830, and the plan is to run a BBQ event for the
attendees. From about 1545, two of the ‘lasses’ had turned up alongside
one of the part-time workers and positioned themselves on the end of the
row of computers on one wall. They are checking Facebook actively. On
another computer, Dean is on Facebook using the charity’s account and
has several chat windows open. When prompted, Dean responded that they
were “chasing up” the rest of the lasses to make sure that they were
coming. As she passed through to go to a meeting elsewhere Andi
convinces the two Slovak lasses to accept her taking a photograph of
them on her way. Dean signs off the computer at 1630 and returns to the
central table. At 1655, there is no sign of the lasses and Dean is
visibly concerned, pacing back and forward. He mutters to the room that
“we should sack this group”. Sonia agrees looks at me and Dean in turn
and then says “this is ridiculous. We have two young people and four
staff”. I am dismissed by Dean who turns and says directly to me “You
can go if you want. It’s a bit weird if we outnumber the girls and we
have loads of staff in”*

This example illustrates two things which are problematic for the
accounting of unproductive labour at the organisation. First, that the
unproductive labour required for the execution of the outcome is
occasionally hidden and cannot always be inferred from the activity. As
we’ve previously discussed, the execution of an event often entails
unproductive labour to ensure that it can occur in the first place, and
that this is accounted for by the workers through processes of internal
task lists or status updates and can be inferred through records of
spending generated such as receipts. What is not immediately transparent
is the existence of Dean’s task of having to ‘chase up’ the
beneficiaries of the event, expending additional effort to make the
event possible on top of the labour that has already occurred; and this
labour cannot be discovered or revealed by any means that the
organisation use to account for time or effort. Second, the outcomes
often don’t reflect the scale of the labour input by the workers. Dean
spends several hours on the computer engaged in conversation to the
lasses, and labour has already been expended organising the event with
the attendees prior to the night — whereas only two beneficiaries can be
accounted for during the activity. Dean’s utterance of <span>*“we should
sack this group”*</span> indicates as well that this lack of commitment
from the lasses is not an uncommon occurrence and thus that the workers
often input labour to the group that is not reflected in how the success
of the outcome is measured is problematic. Additionally, Sonia indicates
that several staff have committed labour to the event (<span>*“We have
two young people and four staff”*</span>) which further skews the
mapping of input to outcome somewhat when it is accounted for.

Discussion of Findings
----------------------

Our findings demonstrate how the charities experience their
accountability in terms of their values and labour as individual workers
and as an organisation, and how their interactions with technology can
shape their interactions with those they are accountable to. We find
that the organisation and its workers engage in everyday interactions
and processes that they have designed to make themselves accountable by
requiring them to justify their actions, and make them answerable
@fox_uncertain_2007 to each other and their stakeholders in the
immediate community. Accountability, and financial transparency, is
lived in-the-moment and affected by their relationships as individuals
to each other and the communities in which they reside as they respond
to their needs @koppell_pathologies_2005.

The ways in which this lived accountability manifests is also subject to
the data technologies that can be used to capture practice. We see how
accounting for outcomes in charities resembles the practices of
storytelling seen in previous HCI studies @erete_storytelling_2016.
Meanwhile the only way to capture and account for effective financial
practice is to become subject to the transparency measures known to have
little impact on work value, namely accounting for spend
@heald_varieties_2006. In this way, both values and effort are hidden to
the outside, but can be accounted for to those closest to charity and
who benefit directly from its work. As such we see that organisations
express their notions of accountability and transparency through the
socio-technical systems which are constrained by the characteristics of
systems that they have to hand. This in turn implies that systems
deployed in this space have signficant effects on how organisations see
themselves as being accountable.

Previous work in HCI also proposes new ways for systems to account for
the work of organisations in this space @marshall_accountable:_2016 and
speaks to the danger of focusing on the flows of financial capital over
the organisation’s outcomes. We build upon this discussion now by
presenting the ways in which the working practices of those in charities
further affect the design of systems that facilitate transparency and
accountability with regards to work performed by charities and the value
that work has. Whilst the value of ethnographic work should certainly
not be limited to providing design implications for systems
@dourish_implications_2006; our work’s purpose to explore charity
working practices and illuminate how these *do affect system design*. As
such we turn now to explicating the characteristics of systems that seek
to operate in this space.

### Hegemonise

Workers at charities can often see themselves as being accountable to
members of their immediate community for their practice and their
spending, as opposed to others who are removed from this work but can
stipulate responsibility to document it @koppell_pathologies_2005.
Systems put in place by these actors must be engaged with, although we
see that working practices can be adjusted to navigate around formalised
measures designed to provide accountability. We note in particular that
the behaviours workers engage in to become accountable for financial
spending could be considered subversive in terms of system design; most
noticeably the sharing of access tokens (PINs and debit cards) to
personal bank accounts. This touches on prior work in HCI
@vines_eighty_2011 which demonstrates how formalised security protocols
in systems such as banking are negotiated in settings where there is
need for a flexible approach in order to distribute to labour of
purchasing securely using social accountability, rather than that
imposed by digital systems.

We suggest then that digital systems in this space need to acknowledge
and interact with imposed systems and formats, and hegemonise them in
addition to this. Hegemonising in this sense refers to the fact that
organisations have practices that they have designed to make them
accountable to those around them, regardless of the policies and systems
imposed from above. Therefore new digital systems in this space should
afford organisations the ability to focus on their everyday
accountability whilst being able to produce required documentation as a
by-product. This allows them to become accountable to those whose
opinion they care for *in terms that matter to them*, whilst remaining
accountable ‘on-paper’ and acknowledging the difficulty of affecting
policy in this space.

We see this above with subversion of digital accountability in spending,
and this must hold true with systems deployed to provide more
qualitative accounts. Qualitative accounts can be envisioned as allowing
stakeholders to interact with the value, labour and outcomes of the
organisation, but mapping this in a system can be problematic. Digital
technologies could facilitate data collection and interaction with
labour by creating data trails @weiss_digital_2009 or engaging in
practices akin to ‘life logging’, but a system that maps this against
outcomes may risk devaluing the effort of workers in this space as we
see that the mapping of outcomes and labour is not straightforward. In
financial matters, it is difficult to represent the thrift of workers
when involved in purchasing, or willingness to sacrifice salary for the
organisation. In this we see reflected a discussion that measurement of
outcome reduces the ability to perceive the work of an organisation
@lowe_new_2013 that presents a point of tension for the production of
more comprehensive account. To address this, digital systems deployed in
organisations must hegemonise other processes and formats to allow
workers to concentrate on their everyday accountable practices.

### Federate

If we are to produce technologies that allow charities to hegemonise the
processes governing their accountability to others, then the systems we
deploy must operate in a manner that allows them to function both
independently for single tasks as well as considering the wider
ecosystem in which they exist. Producing accounts in charities is
naturally a federated process whereby multiple systems interact to
produce, process, and present accounts and accounting data to a variety
of actors. Producing accounts, and facilitating accountability, with
digital systems in charities should also be federated in nature.

Where accounting for outcomes and finances occurs in charities, it
consists of producing, processing, and then presenting various forms of
data. These procedures mirror processes and models discussed by McAuley
et al @mcauley_dataware_2011, which are notably federated. A federated
system could facilitate the capture of heterogenous types of data that
are suited for the desires of the organisation, and allow other tools to
engage in the processing and presentation of this work. In this way it
becomes a kind of *federated toolkit* that can be used to provide
accountability through different views of the organisation based on the
format and requirement of the consumer.

To illustrate how we envision the form that these federated toolkits may
take, we present some characteristics of them here. We imagine them to
be lightweight, heterogeneous, and able to function independently as
well as in a federated manner. One can envision a mobile application
that captures spending for the user associated with time and location,
can share this with a web-based piece of accounting software which may
also receive and associate data from other sources such as images or
video produced using a variety of other applications. Other actors in
this federation could process the same data in other ways, tailored by
and for those who desire to use them.

These federated toolkits can provide scability and flexibility for
organisations to document their practice, outcomes, and values for
others. Imposed transparency measures dictate the format in which work
and spending is encapsulated, whereas federated toolkits can allow these
to be subverted, navigated and even hegemonised by allowing
organisations new ways to capture their work and its value. It also can
be envisioned that as the work of the organisation evolves, and engages
with new stakeholders, this could facilitate an active form of
transparency @oliver_what_2004 whereby those interested in an
organisation’s work can commission accounts that are meaningful to them
based off of the data collected, and request new information that has
not been captured to date, making them organisation reflexive and
responsive to them.

Concluding Remarks
------------------

In this paper we set out to explore how the everyday working practices
of charities would affect the design of systems that are deployed in
order to make them accountable for their actions and spending. We did
this by explicating the how the obligations for a charity to be
transparent and accountable are lived and experienced in everyday
practice, and how they account for this practice in terms of finances,
outcomes and labour. We then discuss how these practices are shaped by
the socio-technical systems and technologies that the organisations have
access to, and present implications for the design of future systems
that facilitate transparency and accountability in charities with
regards to their form and operation within everyday practice. We draw
out how imposed formats and procedures mean that systems that facilitate
new forms of accountability must hegemonise this formats so that
charities can subvert these and concentrate on communicating their work
and values in terms that matter to them, and how that can be achieved by
producing federated toolkits.

Future work for HCI should seek further engaagement with charities to
collaborate, develop, deploy and study these systems and how they are
appropriated by workers to achieve the goal of operating accountably.
The invisibility of labour, and tensions around how this could be
presented in relation to outcomes, finances, and values should be
considered from the perspectives of both workers and stakeholders in
charities. In this way, HCI can address global challenges facing
charities and impact the experiences and lives of those who interact
with them.

[^1]: E.g. feudalism, capitalism, etc.
