How can digital technologies support NPO Transparency and Accountability?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transparency and Accountability can be said to be ultimately concerned
with the sharing of information and the creation of pathways or
mechanisms that allows stakeholders to act in accordance to it. Meijer
argues that <span>*“modern transparencies are computer-mediated”*</span>
@meijer_understanding_2009, and Oliver goes as far to posit that modern
technologies have sparked a self-sustaining *Information - Transparency
Cycle* which is <span>*“unstoppable”*</span> and that information is now
a commodity which is cheap to collect, organise, analyse, and
distribute; the result of which is a reaction to missing information and
a return to the collection phase @oliver_what_2004. Similarly, Steele,
in his *Open Source Everything Manfiesto* reflects on the ways in which
The Internet has enabled the public to overcome previous restrictions on
access to information and states, in no unclear terms, <span>*“This
bodes well for humanity”*</span> @steele_open-source_2012.

Broadly, there are several strands of research into digital technologies
that support interacting with information and data in this way;
primarily these can be encapsulated within the areas of Open Data, and
Human-Data Interaction (HDI) although the inter-disciplinary nature of
HCI as a whole means that the subject matter naturally intersects or
otherwise touches upon other research within the field. This section
explores the potential and implications for how data may be produced and
appropriated by charities and their stakeholders through a discussion
around Open Data, Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) and Human-Data
Interaction. It then turns to the pragmatic and investigates previous
HCI research into previous examples pertaining to enabling interactions
with finances

**This bit is orphaned at the moment! But intersesting to keep in mind**
An interesting case where Transparency has been built into the core of
digital infrastucture is the Free Software movement and, to a lesser
extent, the Open Source movement (for clarification please refer to
(citation) ). In his original manifesto for Free Software, Stallman
outlines the ‘Four Freedoms’ that all Free Sofware grants, and how the
licensing enforces these. These, in summary, are:

The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose (freedom 0).
The freedom to study how the program works, and change it so it does
your computing as you wish (freedom 1). Access to the source code is a
precondition for this. The freedom to redistribute copies so you can
help your neighbor (freedom 2). The freedom to distribute copies of your
modified versions to others (freedom 3). By doing this you can give the
whole community a chance to benefit from your changes. Access to the
source code is a precondition for this.

Discussing this in terms of Transparency, Camp notes that the conditions
for access to Source Code allows members of the community to effectively
audit the code as one might with an organisation’s accounts.

Open Data, uses and implications
--------------------------------

Open Data is <span>*“data that anyone can access, use, or share”*</span>
@open_data_institute_what_nodate. It consists of organised data that is,
generally, structured and placed online so that it can be consumed for
use. Open Data can be produced, shared, and used by many people in many
different contexts (e.g. scientific data sets, or government collection
of environmental data). Often, it is parsed or processed in some way by
digital technologies, and multiple datasets may also be combined in
order to produce a desired insight for the stakeholder(s) consuming the
data.

Human Data Interaction (HDI) is an coalescing field that is concerned
with the social world of how people interact with data about themselves
and others. Whilst it considers technical infrastructure surrounding
data @mcauley_dataware_2011, HDI also brings data’s role as a ‘Boundary
Object’ @star_institutional_1989 to the fore and considers its role as a
pervasive aspect of everyday life in terms of how to enable citizens to
interact with this data in a more explicit fashion
@mortier_human-data_2014.

A ‘Boundary Object’ is anything which may be recognised across different
social ‘worlds’, yet may be appropriated and adapted by the needs of
individuals and groups in a manner that pertains to their specific needs
and context. Star and Griesemer describe Boundary Objects as
<span>*“both plastic enough to adapt to local needs ... yet robust
enough to maintain a common identity across sites”*</span>
@star_institutional_1989 A good example of this is a receipt of
purchase; it is inarguably a receipt, yet may be used by the bank to
verify a purchase, by a store to prove that you own the items you’ve
purchased, and proof that a transaction has occurred between your bank
account and a store. Further to this, Crabtree and Mortier elaborate
that Boundary Objects are “inherently social” and possess a “processual
character” as part of the infrastructure of everyday life. To this end,
they argue that Data is not so much an object in-and-of-itself but
rather an object that is inherently embedded in human relationships
@crabtree_human_2015.

Data’s use as a Boundary Object is demonstrated effectively by the rise
in personal informatics. In the Quantified Self movement, individuals
collect and process various forms and sources of data about them as
individuals, generally for the purposes of recording progress towards
various goals @swan_emerging_2009 [@swan_quantified_2013]. Contrasting
the movement’s general use of data as a pragmatic, goal-oriented object,
Elsden et al demonstrate that data can be experienced by people in many
ways and can serve different purposes such as providing playful ways to
engage with each other and one’s own data @elsden_quantified_2014
[@elsden_metadating:_2016]. In particular, it is posited that data can
offer an ‘alternative lens’ that other media does not, allowing people
to view or represent an event in a different ways than originally
envisioned and one that can be combined with other more traditional
forms of documenting; and in doing so indicates that the record is
always unfinalised and is continuously open to reinterpretation
@elsden_designing_2017.

Additionally, data as a Boundary Object has place within an
organisational context, offering opportunities to use and present data
in an exploratory context in people’s shared worlds. In an academic
context (most UK Universities possess charitable status and thus belong
to the Third Sector), visualising research funding across the
institution was found to act as a means of supporting members of staff
in understanding the funding landscape of the organisation and in
communicating narratives to the outside world around perceived
successes. The system (and by extension, its data) was also found to
support the review and contestation of data when multiple
interpretations were available, and Elsden et al explicitly note its
implications for organisational transparency; with the caveat that a
major design question raised by the research is whether
contextualisation should occur merely through the data, or in
conversation around it @elsden_resviz:_2016.

As discussed, the presentation of information is not enough to engage in
more modern forms of transparent practice; and the use of data (however
nicely it may be visualised) is no exception to this and risks simply
rehashing the older forms of transparency with faster production of
data. Cornford et al write that the UK Government’s agenda of producing
Open Government Data (OGD) fails to address the questions of how
information is to be interpreted for local contexts; mirroring the
concerns of Elsden et al around how data should be contextualised.
Cornford et al argue that a wealth of open and structured data merely
provides a ‘view from nowhere’ and that the true challenge lies in
developing the interpretive communities that will utilise the
information effectively @cornford_local_2013.

Some successes have been seen in the uses of OGD for engagement; the
London Datastore @noauthor_london_nodate collects, organises, and
distributes a variety of Open Data pertaining to the City of London in
the UK, and has seen great successes in terms of use-cases where
developers and organisations have used data for service provision and
governance purposes @coleman_lessons_2013. In the US, journalists have
begun utilising data to fuel their practice @ramos_journalists_2013, and
it has been argued that the proliferation of OGD has directly
contributed to a ‘habit of engagement’ that in turn begins to develop a
culture of civic participation through the use and responses to data
about our civic world @gordon_making_2013-1. Black and Burstein
conceptualise a movement towards the ‘Twenty-First Century Town Hall’
@black_local_2013 (possibly indicating a full circle movement to a more
direct forms of Transparency discussed above) whereas Bloom postulates
that OGD will form a new Commons resource @bloom_towards_2013.

Sense making and engagement stemming from the use of Open Data draws
upon the field known as ‘Open-Source Intelligence’ (OSINT). Generally,
OSINT concerns itself with the gathering of intelligence for problem
solving from various public information sources @bradbury_plain_2011
[@glassman_intelligence_2012]. This places it in contrast to other forms
of intelligence-gathering which are generally performed using specialist
or secret sources of information. Traditionally, this would look like
utilising sources such as newspapers and public records but in the
modern era sources such as Open Data and Social Media profiles may be
used as viable sources of information to begin making steps towards
solving intelligence problems @bizer_emerging_2009.

The implications of an Open Data-fuelled OSINT for Transparency and
Accountability are evident. As discussed, OSINT is concerned primarily
with the application of information to solve issues or answer questions,
so it stands to reason that an adequate data infrastructure would allow
for (or even promote) engagement of stakeholders in OSINT for asking
questions of charitable organisations (the ‘Habit of Engagement alluded
to earlier @gordon_making_2013-1). At the very least, such an
infrastructure would enable the organisations to produce effective and
interactive responses to queries around the performance of their work
and their spending.

Steele discusses the power of OSINT at length. Coming from a position
that “the only unlimited resource in the world is the human brain”,
Steele puts forward that the engendering of Transparency via the
production of Open Data, and the resultant OSINT practices, would lead
to a systematic practice of exchanging information openly and allow
societal actors and stakeholders to evaluate and respond to complex
problems. Whilst Steele refers directly to engagement with Governmental
processes, this would see use in the context of Charities as well when
presenting information about their work within the context of
complexity. A pragmatic example that might be most interesting for
charities is the example of a ‘True Cost’ calculation – wherein the True
Cost of a white cotton T-Shirt is outlined in economic, societal, and
environmental terms.

In the context of charities, Erete et al explore how NPOs use Open Data
technologies to support their practice through practices resembling
OSINT. Data is largely used to create a narrative and engage in a
story-telling practice around particular goals which differ in context –
e.g. making grant applications, or internal management functions.
Organisations are shown to combine multiple sources of data into a
narrative, as well as being able to derive multiple narratives from a
single data set. Further to this, they discuss how NPOs operate with
limited resources and as such may benefit from services such as Data
Portals to enable them to acquire data easily to produce these valuable
narratives, and put forward that additional value is created via such
portals when they act to build or strengthen relationships between those
seeking to use the data and those possessing skills or knowledge around
its analysis. From the perspective of Transparency and Accountability,
it stands to reason that systems can be developed that allows charities
(NPOs) to engage actively in the data collection process, and allow them
to construct multiple, and varied narratives from personal data sets
that can be used in similar contexts to those described by Erete et al –
ie supporting grant applications and internal management procedures, but
also additional cases such as evidencing their work by retrieving and
presenting information collected about it.

In summation, it appears that digital technologies surrounding Open Data
and its use as a Boundary Object have strong implications for the
support of Charities in terms of Transparency and Accountability. Use of
data has in the past demonstrated a usefulness in civic and academic
contexts, supporting processes that are integral to Transparency (review
and contestation), as well as potentially acting as a vector to allowing
stakeholders to explore the complexities orbiting particular topics such
True Cost, and therefore spending. With this in mind the discussion now
turns to previous HCI work in the area of interacting with finances.

### How do digital technologies allow people to interact with finances?

Some systems allow donators to charities to specify conditions on each
other e.g. CODO, whilst others can coordinate funders. No work on
matching donations to charity activities HCI research has previously
concerned itself with investigating the ways in which can facilitate
people’s interactions around money. At the individual scale, this has
occurred through studies investigating how people manage personal
finances in particular circumstances, as well as how people engaged with
money on an experiential level. At larger scales, HCI has also taken
into account the social world around financial transactions to theorise
around the design of potential future payment systems; and alternative
forms of capital such as cryptocurrencies and the surrounding Blockchain
technologies have accountability baked into the infrastructure of the
systems themselves. Kaye et al () show that people construct separate
and distinct <span>*“pots of money”*</span> based on either source of
income, or desired purpose @kaye_money_2014. This manifests in daily
practices such as separate bank cards for various purposes, and whilst
an individual may place value on a particular silo beyond a financial
figure (e.g. emotional attachment to work involved) – Kaye et al note
that digital systems assign low importance to silos that are irregular
or difficult to categorise @kaye_money_2014. Individuals are also shown
to have varying degrees of awareness of finances they manage (their own,
or that of friends/family finances), and either experience their
finances through occasional glimpses, or through tracking systems that
they set up @kaye_money_2014. Vines et al note that awareness of
financial situations is characteristic of individuals (or households)
which have alow income, and propose design challenges concerning the
ability for systems to: allow users to delay or prioritise payments.

At the community Scale, Ferreira et al explored the social world
surrounding money, specifically a community currency known as the
Bristol Pound. Their work discusses how exchanges of money using the
currency shared aspects of a conversation, as the transactors would
engage in social interactions that were unbounded by the settings roles
such as ’shopkeeper’ and ’customer’, prompted by the technology use
required to pay with the currency. Further to this, the use of the
shared currency (and the technological systems supporting it) gave the
transactors an indication of shared values and interests.

Crowdfunding websites such as Kickstarter offer options wherein donators
to a particular fund may have their donation returned if, for example,
the total requested amount of donations has not been met. Beltran et al
extend this concept further with their deployment of ‘Codo‘ which they
describe as “Fundraising with Conditional Donations”. In this
deployment, Beltran et al describe how they developed a logical grammar
which allows a donor on the system to more richly prescribe (or
describe) the conditions of their donation, such as matching funds from
other individuals or those within a defined group. Whilst this system
does not proffer much in the way of exploring how organisations can
report back on their expenditure, it presents the case that conditions
may be put forward and codified as a means of providing a rudimentary
accountability; as an organisation may need to attract the support of
more than disparate groups in order to receive their donations. This
opens up the possibility that a system may be developed with an
’accountability spin’, where conditions are put upon funds by Funding
bodies that request reimbursement under the event that conditions that
they set out are not adequately met.

Opportunities
-------------

Summary {#sec:related:conclusion}
-------
